Around the year 1200 AD, the medieval
Arab traveler and scholar Abd Al-Latif
Al-Baghdadi departed from his hometown
of Baghdad and set out on a journey of
exploration.
As a young man, Al-Baghdadi had studied
law, medicine, and philosophy, and was
inspired by the works of classical
philosophers; in particular,
Aristotle. At the turn of the 13th
century, Al-Baghdadi embarked on a series
of journeys that would take him to many
of the great cities in the region. He
traveled to Mosul, to Jerusalem, Damascus,
and Aleppo, and eventually, around the
year 124, his journey took him across
the Sinai Desert to the banks of the
Nile. On his travels, Al-Baghdadi wrote a
book that was part travel account and
part philosophy, entitled The Book of
Edification and Admonition. In it, he
recalls the remarkable impression that
Egypt made on him.
Egypt is a land of wondrous monuments
and strange stories. It consists of a
valley enclosed by two ranges of hills;
one to the east, and one to the west. The
Nile runs between them until it reaches
Lower Egypt, where it divides into
branches, all of which flow out into the
sea. The Nile is unusual for its length.
We know of no other river in the
inhabited world that covers a greater
distance.
As Al-Baghdadi traveled around Egypt, he
was struck by the incredible variety of
ancient remains he saw; great temples of
stone and tomb complexes crumbling
beside the waters of the Nile. But none
of these compared to the most fabled of
all Egypt's monuments, which rose over
the horizon not far from the city of
Memphis, at a place called
Giza. The ancient monuments in Egypt are
such as I have never seen nor heard tell
of in other lands. First among them are
the pyramids. They are very numerous. All
are situated on the Giza side of the
Nile and extend in the direction of
Memphis, spread out along a distance of
about two days  journey. Some are big, others
small; some are of clay and mud brick, but
most are of stone. Some are stepped, but
most of them taper
smoothly. Of all these pyramids, three
stood out for their seemingly impossible
immensity. Turning to the pyramids that
everyone talks about, points at, and
characterizes in terms of their sheer
size, there are three laid out in a
straight line at Giza. Two of them are
particularly enormous, and it is with
these two that the poets have been
infatuated. The spectacle is so awe-
inspiring that your sight will falter as
you try to take it all in.
Al-Baghdadi wrote accounts of the
local people who lived close to these vast
remains. He describes some who climbed to
the tops of these structures, and others
who quarried them for their fine-cut
stone. Others still became obsessed with
exploring the hidden tunnels and
chambers that branched out beneath the
pyramids. In one of the great pyramids,
there is an opening that allows people
to gain entry. It leads them into narrow
corridors, labyrinthine passageways, well
shafts, pitfalls, and other such features, as
appear in the accounts of those who
venture inside and explore the innermost
parts. Many people, obsessed by the
pyramid and filled with fanciful ideas
about it, are inspired to penetrate its
depths, but they always end up at some
place beyond which they cannot go. They
spoke of how the pyramid was full of
bats, and how these bats grow to the size
of
pigeons. There are inscriptions on the
stones, written in the ancient characters
that no one understands. In the entire
land of Egypt, I have never found a
single person who so much has claimed to
have heard of anyone who knew how to
read them.
He even seems to have visited the
Sphinx nearby, which was then buried up
to its neck in the sands.
Also, by the three pyramids, at a
distance from them of rather more than a
bow-shot, the likeness of a most enormous
head and neck protrudes from the ground.
The people call it  old father dread , and
assert that its body is buried in the
ground. The face is handsomely, indeed
admirably portrayed, with a touch of
elegance and beauty about the features,
as if a smile were playing across
them. Above all, Al-Baghdadi was impressed
by the mastery of engineering it must
have required to build such
constructions and to have them survive
for such a stretch of time.
The construction of the pyramids
was carried out according to a
methodology remarkable in respect both
to design and to precision of
execution. This is what has enabled the
pyramids to endure time's passing eras;
or rather, it is meant that time itself
has had to endure the era of the
pyramids. Noble intellects gave the
pyramids their all; pure minds exhausted
their every effort for their sake;
enlightened souls outpoured their
loftiest capabilities on their design, to
stand as exemplars that are the pinnacle
of the possible. Because of this, they all
but speak aloud of their builders,
telling us what sort of folk they were,
giving voice to their intellects,
relating the stories of their lives and
times. When Al-Baghdadi visited Giza
around the year 1200, the Great Pyramid
was the tallest man-made structure in
the world, and had been for more than
3,700 years.
All that time, it had testified to
the greatness of a civilization that
had grown up on the banks of the Nile,
a civilization that had passed through
countless periods of flourishing and
decay, and then finally disappeared
beneath the sands of the
desert.
My name's Paul Cooper, and you're
listening to the Fall of Civilizations
Podcast. Each episode, I look at a
civilization of the past that rose to
glory and then collapsed into the ashes
of history. I want to ask, what did they
have in common? What led to their fall,
and what did it feel like to be a person
alive at the time who witnessed the end
of their world? In this episode, I want to
tell the story of one of the most iconic
cultures ever produced by humankind; the
civilizations of Egypt's Nile Valley. I
want to show how this series of related
societies grew up in the floodplains of
their great river, and built some of the
most enduring and recognizable
structures in the world. I want to tell
the story of how they rose, how they
endured, and how they finally faded from
history altogether.
The story of Egypt is one of
the greatest and longest epics in all of
history. Many empires would consider
themselves lucky to last through the
reigns of thirty-one kings, but Ancient Egypt
would see the reign of thirty-one dynasties of
kings, lasting for more than three thousand
years. In the time since, historians have
long struggled with this panoply of
rulers and eras, and have tried to
wrestle the history of Egypt into neat
categories. They typically split its
history into three sets of
dynasties, commonly known as the Old
Kingdom, the Middle Kingdom, and the New
Kingdom. Between these are a number of
intermediate periods when the central
power of its kings failed and the land
divided. Throughout this history, Egypt's
empire would ebb and flow, just like the
great river that gave it life. That river
was the greatest watercourse of the
entire Afro-Eurasian landmass,
the river Nile.
The Nile finds its source in Lake
Victoria, the largest lake in
Africa. It's a body of water about the
size of Georgia, or nearly the size of
Ireland. The gigantic Lake Victoria
drains into the river known as the White
Nile, which is joined by the so-called
Blue Nile further downstream at Khartoum, the
capital of
Sudan. From there, it flows for a further
2,000 km across the Nubian and Egyptian
deserts to Cairo, where it branches out
into a wide delta and empties into the
Mediterranean Sea.
Next to the Amazon River, the Nile is
either the longest or second-longest
river on
Earth. It runs for 6,800 km,
or around a sixth of the way around the
Earth, and its drainage basin covers a
tenth of the entire landmass of
Africa. Egypt itself has an extremely
arid climate, and its inland territories
experience virtually no
rainfall. If geography had been only a
little different and Lake Victoria had
not begun to drain westwards, we can only
imagine how differently history might
have gone. For at least the last
five thousand years, every blade of grass and
every tree in the Nile Valley, every
animal and every person to ever live,
every priest and every king, owes their
existence solely to this
river. Human presence in Egypt is among
the oldest in the world. After evolving
in the region of East Africa, modern
humans migrated primarily along this
corridor, and from there spread to the
rest of the world.
The Nile is, in a sense, the highway
down which all of humanity has once
passed. As one of our first stops along
our great journey, Egypt is home to human
remains of astonishing
antiquity. Stone tools worked by archaic
humans have been discovered in Nile
deposits dating to as early as 600,000
years ago, and modern Homo sapiens
followed in the last 100,000 years or
so. These migrations likely happened
during one of the many African humid
periods that have occurred over the last
millions of years.
These are times when shifts in the
planet's climate caused rains to fall on
the Sahara Desert.
During these periods, the desert bloomed
into a verdant grassland, home to animals
and people, and when the period ended, the
grasses would die, the animals would
leave, and the sands would
return. It's thought that this cycle has
occurred more than two hundred times since
the desert first formed eight million years
ago. The earliest peoples in this region
lived by hunting and fishing, and left
behind stone tools and a multitude of
rock paintings.
From about the year 13,000 BC,
in one of the Sahara's driest periods in
history, the Sebilian culture began
gathering wild wheat and barley, and from
there developed their own domesticated
strains. From 9,000 BC, people began to
weave thread from wool, and another humid
period began.
One enigmatic stone circle at the
desert site of Nabta Playa dates to around
7,500 BC, when the Sahara was a range of
rolling grasslands once
more. This stone monument may have been
used to mark the movements of stars at
different times of the year, so that
people could keep track of cycles like
the harvest and the migration of animals
for hunting. Nabta Playa has been called
Egypt's Stonehenge, but this doesn't
quite do it justice, since it was built
at least five thousand years before the first
stones of Stonehenge were ever
laid. When the last Ice Age ended and the
Sahara once more dried up, any peoples
who had been living and herding in its
grasslands would have been driven out of
their ancestral home. They would have
wandered across the newly-formed desert
until they reached the only stretch of
green in the midst of all that sand. That
was the banks of the Nile, and here they
would make their home.
These peoples would build a
collection of scattered settlements
reaching up and down the river, but
slowly, as more and more people were
driven to the riverbank to survive,
these began to coalesce into larger
towns, cities,
and finally, kingdoms.
The Ancient Egyptians referred
to the whole region by the name  the two
lands , referring to the long Nile Valley
in the south and the delta that spread
out in the north, close to the sea. These
were the two lands that today we call
Upper and Lower Egypt.
Surprisingly, for a modern person
who orients their maps facing north, the
Egyptians thought of their world in the
opposite direction.
As a consequence, their word
for  east  was the same as their word for
left , and  west  the same as  right . In the
Egyptian mind, they were always facing
upstream, waiting for the annual floods
to arrive.
If you find this confusing, as we
continue, just remember that southern
Upper Egypt is the region upstream, and
northern Lower Egypt is
downstream. For many people at this time,
the lands along the riverbank would
have constituted their entire
world. The Egyptians referred to the
river's floodplain as Kemet, or  the
black land , due to the rich, dark soil
left behind by its life-giving
floods. This land was the realm of the
noble god Horus, who had the head of a
falcon, the god of life, protection, and
healing. If you walked just an hour in
either direction, you would soon reach
what they called Deshret, or  the red
land . This was the inhospitable desert
stretching out on all sides; roasting hot,
largely devoid of water and shade, and
inhospitable to most life.
These deserts were presided over by
the god Set, the god of chaos and
violence. The Nile itself they knew
simply by the name Iteru, or  the river ,
since in their world there was no
other. The Egyptian world began in Upper
Egypt far up the reaches of the Nile at
a place now known as
Aswan. Here, a belt of hard granite
crosses the landscape and forces the
river waters into shallow whitewater
rapids, running over boulders and through
rocky channels called
cataracts. This word comes from the Greek
word  kataraktes , or  rushing
down . Today, the waters of these cataracts
have been tamed by the construction of
the Aswan Dam, but in ancient times, they
could be a rushing torrent. Each year,
when the floodwaters passed through this
rocky stretch of the river, they made
such a thundering sound that the Earth
itself could shake, and this led the
Ancient Egyptians to believe that the
waters were coming up from beneath the
Earth, bursting out of vast, subterranean
seas.
At Aswan, they built a temple on an
island in the middle of those rushing
waters, and here worshiped that primeval
force. The fast-flowing waters at Aswan
made it a natural barrier to ships, and
prevented any further exploration upriver.
For this reason, for much of its
early history, this was where Ancient
Egyptian influence ended, the final
extent of their power and border of
their empire.
Beyond Aswan was the southern
lands of Nubia, and for this reason,
Egyptians would also refer to it as  the
narrow gateway to the
south . The temple island in the Aswan
cataracts was known to the Egyptians as
Abu, the Egyptian word for  elephant , since
it was a hub for the ivory trade with
these southern lands. The Greeks would
follow this example, and named the place
Elephantine. From here, trade caravans
would pass over land south to the Darfur
region of Sudan, bringing gold, ivory, and
other goods. But north of Aswan,
everything was considered to be Egypt, as
Herodotus records.
All the land watered by the Nile
in its course was Egypt, and all who
lived lower down than the city
Elephantine and drank the river's water
were Egyptians. Such was the oracle given
to them.
Luckily for the Egyptians, the Nile
flows from the south to the north, while
the prevailing winds blow in the other
direction, meaning that you could use the
winds to sail against the current as far
as Aswan without too much effort. But the
return journey would be even easier,
allowing the river waters to simply
carry you along. A ship heading
downstream to the north from Aswan would
see for some time only rocky desert and
the river bordered by cliffs of hard
Nubian sandstone.
This is not a land well-suited
to agriculture, but in ancient times,
these valleys were sources of natural
resources like gemstones, copper, and gold.
Further north, the red cliffs fall away,
and the floodplain around the river
gets wider.
Here, the landscape would have blushed
green, and a larger population could be
supported. It was in this region that the
desert city of Thebes would grow up,
which the Egyptians called
Waset. This would one day become the most
powerful city in Upper Egypt, the capital
of the desert regions.
The living part of an Egyptian
city, its houses and markets and
workshops, tended to be built on the
eastern bank of the river, where the sun
rises, while the western bank, where the
sun set, was used only for burials and
tombs. Sailing further north, you would
reach the area we call Middle Egypt, and
the floodplain gets wider
still. This region would have been full
of wildlife and
vegetation. Some way to the west of the
river, the waters divert and fill a large
oasis known as Faiyum, which sprouts like a
broad leaf from the stem of the
Nile. In ancient times, this lake was home
to large populations of Nile crocodile,
so that the settlement on the shore
would be known by the Greeks as
Krokodeil polis, or  Crocodile
City . Here, Egyptians apparently even
tamed crocodiles in their temples, as
Herodotus recounts.
Now, for some of the Egyptians, the
crocodiles are sacred animals. Those who
dwelt about Thebes and about the lake
of Moiris hold them to be most sacred, and
each of these two peoples keep one
crocodile selected, which has been
trained to tameness, and they put hanging
ornaments of stone and of gold into the
ears of these, and anklets round the
front feet, and they give them food
appointed and victim of sacrifices, and
treat them as well as possible.
In other places, crocodiles were
hunted for food using ingenious but
risky methods.
A man puts the back of a pig
upon a hook as bait, and lets it go
into the middle of the river, while he
himself upon the bank of the river has a
young live pig, which he beats; and the
crocodile, hearing its cries, makes for the
direction of the sound, and when he is
drawn out to land, first of all, the
hunter plasters up his eyes with muck; and
having done, so he very easily gets the
mastery of him. But if he does not do so,
he has much trouble.
Also living in the river were
the animals that the Greeks would call
river horses , or hippopotamus,
our hippopotamus.
The river horse is sacred
in districts of Papremis, but for the other
Egyptians it is not sacred, and this is
the appearance which he presents; he is
four-footed, cloven-hoofed like an ox, flat-
nosed, with a mane like a horse, and
showing teeth like tusks, with a tail and
voice like a horse,
in size as large as the largest ox; and
his hide is so exceedingly thick that
when it has been dried, shafts of
javelins are made of it.
The most strategically important
location was what the Egyptians called
the balance of the two
lands . This was the place where the river
split into its delta.
As the crossroads between Upper
and Lower Egypt, this was always the
natural place for the capital when the
empire was united.
This location would give rise to
the city of Memphis, and in turn, to
modern Cairo, and it is here that the
Egyptians would build their most famous
and lasting monuments.
Each year, the monsoon rains
falling in the highlands of Ethiopia and
Central Africa would swell the river, and
the annual flood would arrive.
This happened with such regularity,
around the middle of August, that the
Egyptians timed it using the rising of
the star Sirius.
In the fifth century BC, Herodotus wrote
the following description of these floods.
When the Nile is in flood, it
overflows in places as far as two days
journey from either bank. The Nile comes
with a rising flood for a hundred days from
the summer solstice, and when this tale of
days is complete, it sinks again with a
diminishing stream, so that the river is
low for the whole winter, till the summer
solstice again.
The Egyptian year was divided into
three seasons; the flood season of Akhet,
the growing season of Peret, and the
harvest season of Shemu.
Once the flood waters receded in
early autumn, the land was refreshed and
fertilized with rich Nile mud, and new
crops could be grown. In this black mud,
farmers grew emmer wheat, barley, beans, and
lentils throughout the cooler winter
season, and when summer came again, the
grain was ready to be
harvested. Egyptian life was held in this
delicate balance.
Each year, if the river flooded
too little or too much, the results could
be devastating, as one Ancient Egyptian
hymn to the Nile makes clear.
If he is greedy, the whole land
suffers; great and small fall moaning;
people are changed at his
coming. When he rises, then the land is in
joy, then every belly is glad, every jaw
has held laughter.
Since their lives depended so
greatly on these floods, the Egyptians
developed ingenious systems for
measuring them. At the cataracts of Aswan,
they built a series of devices known as
Nilometers. These often take the form of
towers with deep wells inside that allow
the river to flow in, with measurements
inscribed on their walls in Egyptian
cubits. Each year, ancient people would
anxiously check these Nilometers to see how
high the water was rising that year, and
whether it would be a time of famine, a
time of plenty, or a time when they
would need to hastily build some flood
defenses. During the period known as the
pre-dynastic era, the two halves of Egypt
were divided, and this division was
cultural as well as political. The desert
people of southern Upper Egypt worshiped
their own god Nekhbet, who was commonly
depicted as a griffon vulture, a powerful
and majestic
bird. These people were likely darker-
skinned, and had more of a cultural and
linguistic connection with the southern
lands of Nubia and Sub-Saharan Africa,
their rulers sometimes even
intermarrying with the royalty of
southern kingdoms. Meanwhile, the people
of northern Lower Egypt paid deference
to the god Wadjet, usually shown as an
Egyptian cobra.
They had more genetic influence
from North Africa and the Mediterranean,
and may have been somewhat lighter-
skinned. The kings of southern Upper
Egypt ruled while wearing a white,
bulbous crown, while the kings of the
north wore a red crown with a spiraling
representation of a cobra emanating from
it. The kingdoms that ruled over these
regions were always fluid, but the
geographical distinction between Upper
and Lower Egypt always held sway. But
around the year 3000 BC, or more than
five thousand years ago, all that began to
change. That was because of a king of a
kingdom called Thinis. His name was
Narmer. The figure of Narmer is wreathed in
mystery, and what little we know about
him has been pieced together from fragments
of inscriptions and a few significant
artifacts. Narmer was born under the
personal name Menes, but chose Narmer as his
Horus name or king name when he came to
the throne of Thinis, and this name
perhaps gives us some sense of his
personality. That's because  Narmer  means
something like  fighting
catfish . The Nile catfish that the king
clearly admired
is a remarkable species. It's a predatory
fish, a nocturnal hunter that can grow up
to 1.2 meters long, or about the size of a
dolphin, and uses a form of naturally-
generated electricity as a weapon. Using
a unique organ in its body, it can
generate an electric shock of up to 350
volts that stuns its prey. In the largest
catfish, this shock can be enough to stun
an adult human, and the Egyptians were
fascinated by this unique property. They
depicted these shock-and-awe predators
on painted wall murals, and even
experimented with using the weak
electric charges of young specimens as a
treatment for
arthritis. We might imagine that this
King Narmer wanted to emulate some of the
characteristics of these surprise hunters,
but whether it was their patience lying
in wait for their enemies, the tenacity
of their surprise attacks, or the shock and
awe with which they stunned their prey,
we may never know. Virtually the only
source we have for this period is a
carving known as the Narmer Palette, which
contains only a handful of cryptic
clues. One side of this carved artifact
shows King Narmer standing over a defeated
enemy, gripping him by the hair in one
hand and raising a mace in the other.
It's a clear sign of
domination. Here, Narmer is shown wearing
the white, bulbous crown of his native
Upper Egypt, suggesting that he
bludgeoned his rivals there into
submission. On the other side, the carving
shows the king leading an army, while
ranks of his defeated enemies lie before
him. Below this, an image of a bull is
shown tearing down the walls of a
fortress with its horns. On this side of
the carving, Narmer is wearing the Red Crown
of Lower Egypt. From this, we might assume
that he set out on a campaign of
conquest and successfully brought the
two lands of Egypt together. Two mythical
animals carved on one side of the Narmer
Palette stand with their long necks
intertwined, perhaps representing the
coming together of the two sides of
Egypt, their lives and their fates now
inextricably bound.
This was a union that would see the
newly-united Egypt grow to become one of
the most influential societies in early
human history.
At first, Egyptian culture was
heavily influenced by the slightly
older civilizations of Mesopotamia, like
the Sumerians.
Egyptian palaces were often
built to a Sumerian design, and they used
Sumerian motifs in their art, too. But by
at least the year 3000 BC, Egypt had
matured its own indigenous artistic
culture and its own system of
writing. The Greeks would later refer to
these by a word which means  sacred
carving , or hieroglyph.
The Egyptian hieroglyphs are
a mixed writing system that uses a
variety of phonetic symbols, as well as a
collection of symbols that represent
whole words. For example, an image of a
man holding up his hand to his mouth
could be used to represent the common
word  eat , but other symbols that
represented groups of consonants could
be used to spell out other less
common words, names, or
places. Hieroglyphs emerged a little
after the invention of cuneiform in
Mesopotamia, and it's possible they were
inspired by this older writing system. In
Mesopotamia, we can see the gradual
evolution of the cuneiform writing
system from its earliest symbolic roots,
but in Egypt, the earliest discovered
example of hieroglyphs show the symbols
springing into existence already fully-
formed in a complex system. This suggests
that they may have been developed all at
once as a conscious effort, and were
perhaps even devised by a single
person. The Egyptian hieroglyph for  ruler
was the shepherd's crook, since the king
was considered to be a kind of shepherd
for his people. Egyptian kings would even
symbolize their royalty by holding a
gilded, curved crook modeled after those
used by shepherds,
and these kings have come to be known as
pharaohs. The word  pharaoh  derives from
the Egyptian word  per aa , meaning  great
house , and it has stuck in the popular
imagination as the name used for any
Egyptian ruler, partly due to its use in
the Bible. But there is actually no
evidence that it was used to refer to
Egypt's rulers until nearly two thousand
years after Narmer s
lifetime. Up until that time, throughout
the first eighteen dynasties of Egypt's
history, its rulers were simply referred
to as kings or  Neswet , and by epithets
such as  His Majesty . Still, the term
pharaoh  has gained such currency and
popular usage that it's still used to
refer to all the rulers of Egypt across
the ages.
The pharaoh in Ancient Egypt was
considered the living embodiment of the
falcon god Horus and the son of the sun
god Ra.
One later hymn praises the figure of
the king.
Pharaoh is the lord of wisdom whose
mother knows not his name. Pharaoh's
glory is in the sky; his might is in the
horizon. Pharaoh is the bull of the sky
who shatters all at will, who lives on
the being of every god.
Perhaps most famously of all, the
Egyptians were compelled by their
religious beliefs to embalm the bodies of
the dead, ritually cleansing them in
preparation for the afterlife.
The Greek Herodotus, who
traveled widely in Egypt, wrote about the
specialist embalmers who would prepare
bodies in this way in exchange for a
fee. They, whenever a corpse is conveyed
to them, show to those who brought it
wooden models of corpses made like
reality by painting, and demonstrate on
these the best of the ways of embalming;
the second which they show is less good
and also less expensive, and the third is
the least expensive of all. Having told
them about this, they inquire in which
way they desire the corpse of their
friend to be prepared.
With the price negotiated, the
embalmer could begin their work,
the grizzly process of which Herodotus
also describes.
First, with the crooked iron
tool, they draw out the brain through the
nostrils, extracting it partly thus and
partly by pouring in drugs; and after
this, with a sharp stone of Ethiopia, they
make a cut along the side and take out
the whole contents of the belly, and when
they have cleared out the cavity and
cleansed it with palm wine, they cleanse
it again with spices pounded up. Then
they fill the belly with pure myrrh and
with cassia and other spices, and sew it
together again. Having done so, they keep
covered up in natron for seventy days, and
then they wash the corpse and roll its
whole body up in fine linen cut into
bands, smearing those beneath with gum,
which the Egyptians use generally
instead of glue.
Mummification was expensive, and only
those with wealth could afford it; rich
merchants, royal officials, and of course,
the pharaoh himself.
One inscription on the walls of
a tomb for the pharaoh Unus gives a
sense of the kinds of prayers and
blessings that might have been spoken
while these rituals took place; this one to the
sun god Amun-Ra and the moon god Thoth.
Sun and Thoth, take Unus with you, that
he may eat of what you eat of, that he
may drink of what you drink of, that he
may sit where you sit,
that he may sail in what you sail in.
The booth of Unus is plaited of
reeds; the flood of Unus is in the Marsh
of Offerings; his feast is among you, gods;
the water of Unus is wine, like the sun.
Unus will circumnavigate the sky like
the sun; Unus shall course the sky.
Upon coming to the throne of the
newly-united Egypt, King Narmer built a new
capital, perfectly placed at the balance
of the two lands, where the river met the
delta. This city would become known as
Inebu-hedj, or  the city of white walls ,
but today we know it as Memphis.
The kings who followed Narmer
would rule from this new capital, but
they spent much of their time traveling
between palaces, and when they died, their
bodies were still taken back to Narmer s home
region of Thinis in Upper Egypt to be
mummified and buried in the city's
ancestral burial ground at
Abydos. That was until the reign of a
king named Hotep-sekh-emwy.
He ruled from about
2,900 BC, and started what has been
called the second dynasty of Egypt, and
he took the decision to start a new
burial ground near Memphis so that
Egypt's pharaohs could be buried close
to their new capital.
For the site of this new burial
ground, he chose a place on the western
bank of the river, the side where the sun
sets, at a vast, open place called Saqqara.
Saqqara is situated on a raised plateau
that the floodwaters of the Nile do not
reach. Visually, it would have been
striking to ancient people, as the place
where the green river lands end and the
dead sand of the desert abruptly
begins. For this reason, it may have been
considered a crossing place between
death and life,
the perfect place for a necropolis, or a
city of the dead.
For kings who wanted their tombs to
be remembered, it also had the benefit of
being highly visible from the new
capital of Memphis.
Over the coming centuries, this
site would become full of tombs of kings
and queens, and countless royal
attendants and nobles who followed them
into the afterlife.
At first, these tombs were
built in a form known as a mastaba, large,
rectangular constructions built of mud
brick and promising their inhabitants a
rebirth into the next life.
These could be very large, but they
were still relatively
unassuming. But soon, Egyptian pharaohs
would get even more ambitious with their
burial arrangements.
This ambition truly began
with the rule of a pharaoh named
Netjerikhet Djoser.
The reign of Djoser begins the period
known as the Old Kingdom, which would
last for the next five hundred years. Djoser was the
son of a king named Khasekhemwy, who had
reunited Egypt after a period of turmoil,
during which the northern delta rose in
rebellion. With order now restored, Djoser
clearly wanted to keep it that way.
Rather than continuing to travel around
the country as pharaohs before him had
done, he moved to a permanent capital at
Memphis, where he could keep a better eye
on the restive northern
riverlands. Over his nearly three decades
of rule, he set about an ambitious
program of construction, rebuilding
temples, and throwing up fortresses all
along the river, but it was in the manner
of his burial that he would truly leave
his mark.
When Djoser began the construction of
his final resting place, it looked a lot
like the mastaba tombs of the kings that
had come before, but his royal architect
soon began dreaming of a more ambitious
structure. He was a visionary chancellor
and engineer who held numerous official
titles in the kingdom, including  head of
the royal shipyard ,  royal seal bearer , and
overseer of all stone works .
His name was Imhotep.
Imhotep s name means  the one who
comes in peace , and he was born in the
27th century BC, but beyond that, much of
what we know about him has been
distorted by myth and legend. He was
something of a polymath; a priest, a
statesman, a scribe, physician, and
architect, and even gained fame as a
magician. He also has the distinction of
being perhaps the first non-royal person
to be recorded in any detail by
history. As the king's most trusted
architect, Imhotep was put in charge of
the construction of Djoser's tomb, but it
would not be a regular mud brick mastaba
like his predecessors.
In fact, Imhotep was
determined to build this tomb out of
stone. This stone would need to be
quarried from the bedrock nearby, roughly
cut into blocks.
But as this stone mastaba rose
out of the desert, Imhotep seems to have
had an idea.
With this stronger building
material, the structure could support
more weight, and so, there was no real
reason to stop building.
Once the first mastaba was
built, he experimented with placing
another smaller one on top of it, and
then another on top of that, creating a
stepped design like a wedding
cake. Originally, Imhotep planned to build
this construction four tiers high, but
soon he became even more
daring. By the time it was finished,
Djoser's tomb stood six layers high. It was
perhaps the world's first large-scale
construction made from cut stone, and
rising to a height of sixty-two meters, it was likely
also the tallest building on Earth.
Finally, the stepped pyramid of
Djoser was complete, and when the king died,
he was laid to rest in a granite chamber
beneath the great edifice, surrounded by
a maze of tunnels.
Djoser s pyramid was a
revolutionary step in Egyptian
architecture, and it would stand as a
challenge to all the kings who would
follow him, a challenge that they would
find irresistible.
The difficulties that
engineers like Imhotep faced in building
these pyramids were enormous, but their
achievement becomes even more impressive
when you consider that these monuments
also had to be built fast.
Today, Egypt is littered with the
remains of half-built
pyramids. These were abandoned halfway
through their construction, usually
because the pharaoh who commissioned
them had died early.
Once a pharaoh was dead, it seemed
no one saw any point in continuing to
build his tomb. After all, there was a new
pharaoh now, and construction on his
pyramid would have to begin right
away. For this reason, pyramids usually
had to be completed, at the very least,
within thirty years.
Only the kings with the longest
and most stable reigns would ever live
to see the final capstone placed.
The next pharaoh after Djoser was
a man named Sekhemkhet, who may have
been Djoser's brother, and he would join the
ranks of the unfinished.
As soon soon as he came to
the throne, he began the construction of
another stepped pyramid of immense
ambition, sure to dwarf his brother's
achievement. But only the first layer of
the pyramid was built when Sekhemkhet died,
just six or seven years into his reign, and
the pyramid was abandoned.
Another king, Khaba, also died
after six years, before his stepped pyramid
could be completed.
To build each pyramid, the
Egyptians would require enormous amounts
of laborers, as many as 100,000 per
pyramid, with about 10,000 laboring at
any one time. There's a widespread
misconception that these monuments were
built by armies of slaves, but most
historians now believe this not to be
true. Slavery was an aspect of Egyptian
society, as it was across the ancient
world, and slaves were mostly taken from
prisoners of war, and also from those who
fell into debt or committed serious
crimes. But slaves were mostly used as
domestic servants, or if they were
unlucky, toiled in extraction industries
like mining and
quarrying. These were considered an
underclass, and would not have been
trusted with the construction of such
important and sacred
buildings. In fact, evidence shows that
the pyramid builders were a mixture of
professional artisans and laboring
peasants who worked seasonally
in exchange for rations.
The life of an Egyptian farmer
was dictated by the coming and going of
the annual floods, and there were only a
few times of year when they could be
meaningfully employed in the fields. For
the rest of the time, they would have
leased out their services to
construction projects, the digging of
canals and other public works,
and construction of
pyramids. While they labored for the king,
these workers drank beer three times a
day, and ate meat
regularly. They toiled in three-month shifts,
and were divided into teams of twenty men.
The discovery of their graffiti, hidden on
the inward-facing sides of some stone
blocks in the pyramids, shows that they
gave themselves playful and boisterous
team names, some of which have been
recorded.  The Friends of Khufu .
The Vigorous Gang .  The Followers of the
Powerful White Crown of Khufu .  Those Who
Know the Pharaoh .  The Drunkards of
Menkaure . It seems their supervisors fostered
a sense of team pride and healthy
competition, perhaps giving honors and
extra beer rations for those who shifted
the most blocks.
Doubtless the work was
backbreaking, but over the following
millennium, millions of Egyptians would
take this deal.
Perhaps they also felt a sense of
pride at the great constructions they
were taking part in, which if all went
well, they would live to see
completed. These laborers were
sufficiently respected that any who died
during the construction were buried in
tombs within the royal complex, their
bodies forever a part of the monolith
they had given their lives to build, an
honor that would never have been given
to a slave.
The vast administrative effort of
building these tombs over the next
centuries required a fundamental
restructuring of Egyptian government. In
the past, most of the high positions of
state had been doled out to the
pharaoh's family, but with such ambitious
projects to be completed, skilled people
would be needed.
In the decades that followed,
individual functions of government such
as the Master of Scribes and Controller
of Workshops were separated out, and
these roles were delegated to capable
individuals who were promoted on
merit. The Egyptologist Toby Wilkinson
summarizes the transformation in the
following terms.
As Egypt embarked on pyramid-
building, the pyramids were building Egypt.
This new caste of civil servants
took pride in their work. One Egyptian
text of the fifth dynasty records the advice
that a vizier named Ptah-Hotep gave to his
son about how to be a successful administrator.
Let not your heart be
puffed up because of your knowledge. Be
not confident because you are a wise man.
Take counsel with the ignorant as well
as the wise. Good speech is more
hidden than the emerald, but it may be
found even among maidservants at the
grindstone.
Still, the failures of the kings
that followed Djoser must have left a
mark on the empire's morale. Their
crumbling, half-finished pyramids stood
in the desert as an image of kingship
that could also be fragile and
fleeting. With his stepped pyramid, Djoser
had laid down a provocation that would
have to be answered. But it wasn't until
the reign of a king named Sneferu that
someone would rise to the challenge.
Sneferu's full name was
Hor-neb-Ma at-Snefru-waj;
Horus, Lord of Ma at, has perfected me .
Ma at, in Egyptian religious belief, was
the embodiment of justice and truth,
sometimes portrayed as a goddess wearing
an ostrich feather on her head, who kept
the stars and the seasons in their
regular patterns and maintained
peace. Opposed to her in their theology
was the concept of
Isfet; chaos, darkness, and
disorder. This was sometimes depicted as
a great coiling serpent.
For the most part, Sneferu s name
seems to have been appropriate. Under the
protection of Ma at, he reigned for as
long as forty-eight years, a time of prosperity
and stability. His accession to the
throne is remembered in the later
Egyptian source, the Prisse Papyrus.
The majesty of the king of
Upper and Lower Egypt, Huni, came to the
landing place of death, and the majesty
of the king of Upper and Lower Egypt,
Sneferu, was raised up as a beneficent
king in this entire land.
During his half-century on the
throne, Sneferu would secure his place as
Egypt's most ardent and determined
pyramid-builder.
With the failure of the last
kings to build a stepped pyramid to
match Djoser s, Sneferu began to wonder if he
could build something even better, a
pyramid that conformed to a perfect
geometrical shape. He had a vision of a
pyramid with polished, smooth sides,
unlike anything the world had seen
before. His first attempt to accomplish
this would be at the pyramid of Meidum.
There is some debate about whether the
Meidum pyramid was built by Sneferu or by his
predecessor Huni, but we can assume they
wouldn't compete for the honor, as it
stands as one of the most impressive
failed pyramids in history.
The Meidum pyramid was built in
several stages.
First, it was a stepped pyramid of
similar design to Djoser s,
and then this interior structure was
encased in a steep shell of white
limestone, creating a high and narrow
point. The effect would have been
beautiful. That is until one day, as the
pyramid neared completion, when the
entire weight of the stone facing began
to collapse in all directions.
We can only imagine the noise
and calamity that must have accompanied
this; the workers leaping clear of the
wreckage, the overseers watching aghast as
an avalanche of painstakingly cut stone
poured off the side of the pyramid. The
moment this happened, Sneferu ordered the
construction to be halted. Workmen inside
the interior chambers simply put down
their tools and left.
Today, the burial chamber inside the
pyramid is still unfinished, with raw,
uncarved walls and wooden supports still
in place, which were usually removed
after construction.
Sneferu must have been
devastated, but he wasn't
discouraged. Soon, he tried again with a
pyramid at the site of
Dahshur, just to the south of the royal
necropolis of Saqqara.
This pyramid was intended to be
tall, and its sides were even steeper
than the first. His workmen began to
construct it with a sharp 53-degree slope to
its sides, and this time, Sneferu must have
hoped that he would get the pyramid he
dreamed of. But this would not turn out
to be the case. This second pyramid was
built on ground that was only soft sand
and shale.
As the pyramid took shape and its
weight climbed into the millions of tonnes,
they found that the stone was sinking
into the earth and causing cracks to
appear in the structure.
We can only imagine how it
felt to be the architect who had to
bring this bad news to the king, the son
of Ra, the living embodiment of the god
Horus. The workmen tried everything they
could, from adding new supporting blocks
to the base to propping up subsiding
sections with huge beams of cedar wood,
but it was hopeless. It became clear that
if they continued the pyramid as planned,
it would likely collapse just as the
first one had.
The pharaoh Sneferu seems to have
listened to reason. He consented to allow
his workmen to hurriedly finish the
pyramid with a reduced angle of only
43 degrees and a final height reduced by twenty-
five meters. This means that today, the pyramid has
a peculiar snub-nosed appearance that has
given it the name  the bent pyramid .
It s clear that Sneferu still wasn't
satisfied. He now ordered the
construction of a final pyramid one kilometer
to the north, combining everything his
craftsmen had learned from the first two.
This one was now built with a 43-degree
incline from the beginning, more evenly
distributing the weight on the earth, and
finally, Sneferu got the pyramid he
desired. This was the first structure
that truly took the iconic shape of an
Egyptian pyramid, and would be used as a
model for those that would be built in
years to come.
It was 105 meters high, nearly twice the
height of Djoser's pyramid and the
world's new tallest building,
and its geometrical perfection
was undeniable.
When Sneferu died, he was
buried in this pyramid according to
his wishes, and his son took the throne.
He would be the greatest pyramid-builder
of all. His name was Khufu.
As a boy, Khufu must have seen his
father Sneferu obsessed with the
construction of his three
pyramids. We can imagine the young prince
listening in on his father's
conversations with his architects, the
tension and anger as the first two
pyramids failed, and then the final
triumph of the red pyramid. Perhaps
as a boy, he dreamed of one day building
such a monument for himself.
We know very little about Khufu
or what his reign was like, but it's
clear that he was inspired by one thing;
size, and above all, the desire to build
the largest pyramid that would ever
stand. Learning from his father's
mistakes on the bent pyramid and likely
inheriting some of his architects, Khufu
elected to build his tomb some fifteen
kilometers to the northwest of Saqqara, on a
shelf of strong limestone just outside
Memphis, at a place called Giza.
When construction began on the
Great Pyramid, there must have been some
uncertainty about whether it would even
be possible. It was built using an
estimated 2.3 million large, stone blocks,
weighing a total of six million tonnes, and
when its first layer was completed, it
was the size of more than ten football
pitches. Its builders used predominantly
local limestone quarried from nearby on
the Giza Plateau to build the pyramid's
interior structure, and these were bound
together with lime mortar packed with
straw and charcoal.
Luckily, these organic remains
in the pyramid mortar can be carbon
dated, allowing archaeologists to date
the pyramids with scientific certainty
to this period.
But while rough stone would do
for the main body, the king's burial
chamber at its heart was made of blocks
of hard granite brought from Aswan, since
it needed to resist the crushing weight
of millions of tonnes of stone above it.
The fine limestone blocks of its outer
shell were quarried at a place called
Tura, on the other side of the river. The
stone from these quarries was of
exceptional quality, a pale white in
color, almost like marble.
For this reason, it was highly
prized for use on the interiors of
tombs, and the perfect casing for a
pyramid. This limestone was cut out of
underground tunnels in these quarries and
dragged down to the banks of the Nile,
where it was loaded onto barges to be
carried downstream.
In order to ease the
transportation of these stones, the
Egyptians dug a series of canals and
artificial harbors that came right up to
the base of the pyramids, one of which
was known as She-Khufu, or  the pool of
Khufu . One papyrus has been uncovered, the
oldest ever found, that is the work
journal of an overseer named
Merer. In it, he records the process of
this perhaps less than exhilarating task.
Day 25: Inspector Merer spends the
day hauling stones in Tura South;
spends the night at Tura.
Day 26: Inspector Merer casts off
from Tura loaded with stone; spends the
night at the pool of Khufu.
Day 27: Sets sail loaded with stone;
spends the night at the pyramid.
Day 28: casts off from the
pyramid in the morning; sails upriver to
Tura South. Day 29: Inspector Merer
spends the day hauling
stones in Tura South; spends the night at
Tura. Day 30: Inspector Merer spends the
day hauling stones in Tura South; spends
the night at Tura.
Remarkably, the pyramid was
oriented perfectly to true north, with
one of its faces at each point of the
compass, suggesting that the Egyptians
must have used measurements of the
stars in order to align it, the only
method by which they could have achieved
such accuracy.
With the kingdom's now
exceptional organization, it's been
estimated that it took only about twenty-
three years to build, with the final stones
being placed around 2560 BC.
Upon its completion, the Great Pyramid
of Giza would stand 147 meters high,
or nearly forty stories.
It was the tallest man-made
structure in the world, and would remain
so for nearly four thousand years.
The building that eventually
surpassed it, the wooden spire of Lincoln
Cathedral in England, completed in 1311,
would stand for little more than two
centuries before it collapsed in a
storm. Today, Khufu has cemented his name
into history with the construction of
these monuments, but other than his
ambitious pyramid, little else is known
about him. The only representation of him
ever found is a single statuette carved
from ivory, and ironically for a man so
obsessed with grand scale, this statue is
only seven centimeters, or less than three
inches, tall. When Khufu died around
2525 BC, his son Djedefre would take the
throne. But his reign was short, and when
he died, another of Khufu s sons became
pharaoh. His name was Khafre.
The pharaoh Khafre would follow in
his father's and grandfather's footsteps,
and build a grand pyramid of his own. He
would place it right beside his father s,
but for some reason, he declined to build
it any higher.
It could be that his builders, perhaps
tiring of this mania for ever bigger and
better pyramids, simply told him that it
wouldn't be possible to build any bigger.
It may be that Khafre worried that it
would have appeared unseemly to one-up
his dead father quite so ostentatiously.
Perhaps for this reason,
Khafre's pyramid would be a differential three-
and-a-half meters shorter than his father's,
although he he was sure to place it on a
slightly higher shelf of limestone,
meaning that from many angles, it appears
taller. Coupled with slightly steeper,
angled sides, this meant Khafre was also
able to build his pyramid with perhaps
350,000 fewer stone blocks, a saving that
his teams of laborers and stonemasons no
doubt appreciated.
Today, the pyramid of Khafre
is the only pyramid at Giza to retain
any of its original casing stones of
smooth, white Tura limestone, which still
cling to the top-third of the structure,
perhaps since its steeper sides made it
more difficult for stone thieves to
extract the very top of its masonry.
This allows us to picture how
these monuments would have looked in
their golden age, the smooth, white sides
that must have gleamed blindingly in the
the desert sun, and at night shone in the
light of the moon.
These pyramids were also likely
capped with a stone known as a
pyramidion, usually carved of diorite or
granite, and carved with
hieroglyphs. Some examples of these
pyramidions have been found with
distinctive grooves that suggest that
they were encased in a decorative metal,
either copper or shining electrum, an
alloy of gold and silver.
Since the pyramidions for the Giza
pyramids have never been found, it's
unknown whether their tops were encased
in metal, but if they were, it would have
made them an even more impressive sight,
a gleaming pinnacle reaching up to the
heavens. Within only a hundred years or so
of the construction of Djoser's first
stepped pyramid, all of Egypt's largest
pyramids had already been built, all by
only three generations of the same
family. But almost from the moment the
final capstone was placed on Khafre's
massive monument, enthusiasm for enormous
pyramids began to wane.
The pharaoh Menkaure, the son of Khafre
and grandson of Khufu, also built his
pyramid at Giza around 2510 BC, but his
would be significantly smaller.
It's not even a tenth the size of the
Great Pyramid, and only two-thirds
the size of even Djoser's stepped
pyramid. One explanation for this was
that Menkaure didn't expect to live long
enough to build such a grand
construction as his
predecessors. Herodotus records one piece
of tradition about the pharaoh Menkaure,
which recounts how an oracle told him
that his reign would be short.
As a result, he determined to make the
best of the time he had, and perhaps this
left him little time for pyramid-building.
The king deemed this unjust, and
sent back to the oracle a message of
reproach, blaming the god; why must he die
so soon, whereas his father and his uncle
had lived long? He caused many lamps to
be made, and would light these at
nightfall and drink and make merry. By
day or night, he never ceased from reveling,
roaming to the marsh country and the
groves and whenever he heard of the
likeliest places of pleasure.
Whether there's any truth to
this or not, it's clear Menkaure had
different priorities to Khufu and Khafre,
and his more modest pyramid seems to
have broken the spell of his family's
one-upmanship.
For the next thousand years, pharaohs
would continue to build pyramid tombs,
but they would be mostly at a much
reduced scale, and they would cut bigger
and bigger corners in their
construction. Instead of a solid
limestone structure, these later
monuments would often be a simple
limestone shell encasing a core of mud
brick, or simply earth and sand. For this
reason, little remains of these later
pyramids other than melancholy heaps
alone in the desert.
Slowly, the practice would begin
to die out altogether.
The reason Egyptians stopped
building pyramids was partly due to
changes in religious attitudes towards
burial, but it also seems to have stemmed
from concern over tomb-robbers.
After all, a pyramid was
essentially an enormous sign announcing
to the world that the richest man in
Egypt was buried there. From the earliest
days, people were drawn to the tombs of
long-dead kings to attempt to steal
their treasures.
One tomb inscription of a
royal architect named Ineni gives us a
clue about these changing priorities.
He writes that he constructed his king s
tomb not in an ostentatious declaration
of power, but in total secrecy.
I supervised the excavation of
the cliff tomb of His Majesty alone, no
one seeing, no one hearing.
Even with these secret tombs,
grave-robbers were still a constant
concern. One pharaoh of the later New
Kingdom would order an inspection of his
predecessors  tombs, and his inspectors
brought back troubling news.
The tomb of the king; it was found
that the evildoers have damaged it
by forcing an opening into the main
chamber of his tomb, through the passage
wall of the sanctuary of Nebamen,
superintendent of the grain stores of
the king. In the funerary place, the body of
the king had been removed, and the tomb
of his royal spouse, the royal lady of
Nubshas, was empty. The robbers had laid
violent hands on them.
It wasn't just the precious
treasures inside that were
stolen. As the overseer Merer had found,
cutting the limestone blocks from the
quarries of Tura was one of the most
time-consuming parts of construction.
For this reason, pharaohs who felt more
pressed for time sometimes despoiled
previous pyramids of their cut stone in
order to speed along their own
monuments. One Middle Kingdom text known
as the Instruction of Merikare advises
kings against this shameful practice.
Do not despoil the monument of another,
but quarry stone in Tura.
Do not build your tomb out of ruins,
using what has been made for what is to
be made.
In place of constructing their own
pyramids at Saqqara or Giza, the later
pharaohs would be buried at a place near
Thebes that the Egyptians called  the
Great and Majestic Necropolis of the
Millions of Years of the Pharaoh , or
sometimes  the Great Field , but today it
is known as the Valley of the
Kings. Here, a natural rock formation
known as el-qurn, or the horn, rises above a
series of dramatic red cliffs.
When viewed from the entrance to
the tombs here, this pointed peak
somewhat resembles a natural
pyramid. It's possible that this
convenient landform may have relieved
some of the pressure on Egypt's pharaohs
and allowed them an equally prestigious
place to be buried, while freeing up an
untold amount of energy and manpower in
the kingdom.
Egypt's manual laborers could
perhaps breathe a sigh of relief. Slowly,
the age of the pyramids came to an end.
Still, that was a long time in the future,
and throughout the fourth and fifth
dynasties of Egypt, royal monument
construction continued
confidently. But in the sixth dynasty,
around the 23rd century BC, construction
began to decline.
Part of the reason for this was
an increasing decentralization of the
empire and a gradual weakening of the
power of the king.
The final pharaoh of the Old
Kingdom was named Pepi II.
He came to the throne at the age of
six, and ruled for more than sixty years.
Pepi was an excitable and enthusiastic
child, as we can see from one tomb
inscription by one of his officials
named Harkhuf.
Harkhuf had a long and illustrious
career. He served
as the mayor of one of Egypt's
southern provinces in the region of the
Nile cataract of Aswan, the narrow gate
to the south.
The highlight of his life was the
four journeys of exploration he
undertook on behalf of his pharaoh,
following the Nile down into the heart
of Central Africa into what the
Egyptians called  the horizon lands . He
wrote a full account of one of these
expeditions on the walls of his tomb.
I accomplished it in seven months.
I brought back from there all sorts of
beautiful, exotic produce, and was praised
for it very greatly. I came back with three
hundred donkeys laden with incense, ebony,
precious oil, grain, leopard skins, and
elephant tusks.
The boy pharaoh Pepi was so
delighted with Harkhuf's trip that he wrote a
letter directly to him. The letter was
likely written on fragile papyrus and
has not survived, but luckily, Harkhuf was so
proud of this sign of royal favor that
he had the letter copied out word for
word on the wall of his tomb, his
proudest moment etched into stone for
eternity. In it, we get a sense for the
voice of this excitable young king.
You know how to do what your lord loves
and favors. You wake and you sleep
planning to do what your lord loves, favors,
and commands. Unique friend Harkhuf!
Pepi was especially excited by a
small man that Harkhuf had come across in
East Africa and had brought back with
him, perhaps either a man with dwarfism
or a member of the so-called pygmy
tribes of Central Africa.
You have further said in this message
that you have brought a dwarf of the
god's dances from the land of the
horizon-dwellers. Come downstream to the
residence at once. Hurry and bring with
you this dwarf that you have brought
alive, prosperous, and healthy, for the
king. When he goes down with you into the
boat, have excellent people around him on
deck lest he fall in the water. My Majesty
wishes to see this particular dwarf
more than the produce of the lands.
However, as a pharaoh, Pepi was
relatively ineffectual.
During his childhood, his
mother and grand viziers seem to have done
much of the ruling, and as an adult, he
continued a relatively hands-off
approach to the kingdom.
For much of its history, Egypt
had been governed by regional
administrators known as nomarchs, who
were appointed by the pharaoh to rule
over their regions on his behalf.
Pepi's long reign saw an
increasing amount of power passing to
these regional governors.
Gradually, their positions
became hereditary rather than appointed,
so that single families began to amass
large amounts of power, and their tombs
became larger and more elaborate with
every passing year.
These nomarchs were soon beginning to
look a lot like feudal lords or even
petty kings, and even began fighting
amongst themselves. Meanwhile, the once
boy king Pepi was now entering his seventies,
frail and increasingly detached from the
business of ruling.
This might not have been a death
blow for the kingdom, but it was around
this time that a record drought
descended over Egypt and the entire
Eastern Mediterranean, starting around
the year 2,200 BC.
This climate shift we have
encountered before; it is known as the
4.2 kiloyear event, and has been
implicated in the collapse of the
Akkadian Empire in Mesopotamia, and
perhaps even the Indus Valley
civilization in India and
Pakistan. In Egypt, the result of this
event was a series of years in which the
Nile floods were much reduced, and
agriculture came under immense pressure.
The drought was so severe and
long-lasting that the verdant lake at
Faiyum that once stood sixty-five meters
deep completely dried up over the next fifty
years, and crop yields would have
plummeted. The long reign of a pharaoh
was usually good news for the
kingdom. It tended to generate a period
of stability and often prosperity,
but when a king's rule went on too long,
it had the tendency to create what we
might call  the old king problem .
The long reign of the pharaoh
Pepi, along with his multiple wives, meant
that he had countless children, many of
them now old men themselves with
children and grandchildren of their own,
and they were all impatient to see this
old king pass on so that they would get
their chance to rule. When Pepi finally
died around 2175 BC,
what followed was a succession
crisis of immense
proportions. The chaos serpent of Isfet
now wound its way around all the lands
of Egypt.
In the two decades that followed, the
kingdom would see no fewer than seventeen
pharaohs come and go, some perhaps dying
of old age, and others no doubt killed by
their rivals.
The only one of these kings to
survive more than a year on the throne
was a man named Ibi, who even, somewhat
optimistically, tried his hand at
building a pyramid at the royal burial
ground of Saqqara. But this monument was a
testament to the now much-reduced state
of the empire.
Standing at little more than thirty
meters high, it was smaller than the pyramids
of some of the earlier kings  wives. On top
of that, it was lazily constructed around
a core of mud and limestone chips.
King Ibi, the man who was to be
buried under this sad monument, ruled for
only two years, one month, and a day,
and likely did not control all of Egypt.
Now, local nomarch governors declared
independence and ruled their provinces
alone. Their tombs around this time stop
referring to the reign of a pharaoh, and
are full of boasts and elaborate titles
that they seem to have invented for
themselves. One tomb inscription for a
powerful nomarch named Ankhtifi demonstrates
how the centralized power of the king
was declining.
I am the vanguard of the men,
the rear guard of the men; a leader of
the land through active conduct, strong
in speech, collected in thought, for I am
without Peer, who spoke out when people
were silent, on the day of fear, when
Upper Egypt was silent.
Ankhtifi recalls the time of famine
that swept over the land as crisis after
crisis rocked the struggling Old Kingdom.
All of Upper Egypt was dying of
hunger to such a degree that everyone
had come to eating his children, but I
managed that no one died of hunger in
this province. The entire country had
become like a starved grasshopper, with
people going to the north and to the
south in search of grain.
Egypt was now fracturing into something
like the shape it had been before King
Narmer had fused it into a stable
centralized state nearly eight hundred
years before. Refugees were flooding the
roads. Another later Egyptian writer
called Ipuwer, who lived in the period
following this chaos, describes people
resorting to theft to survive, and
violence spreading.
The guardians of the house say,  Let us go
and steal.  The snarers of birds have
formed themselves into armed bands. The
peasants of the delta have provided
themselves with shields. A man regards
his son as his enemy. The wrongdoer is in
every place. The inundation of the Nile
comes, yet no one goes out to plough.
Ipuwer describes a widespread economic
collapse, during which trade from foreign
lands dried up.
The skilled masons who built pyramids
now labor on farms, and those who tended
the boat of the gods are yolked together
in ploughing.
Men do not go on voyages
today. What shall we do for cedar wood for
our mummies, in coffins of which priests
are buried, and with the oil of which men
are embalmed?
They come no longer. Everything
is in ruins. Laughter is dead.
If I only knew where god was,
I would make offerings to him.
Throughout this period of about two
hundred years, some at least must have dreamed
of a better time awaiting them in the
future. Another text written after this
time, known as the Prophecy of Neferti,
contains a prediction that a ruler would
come who would end this time of strife.
A king will come. He will take the
white crown; he will wear the red crown.
He will unite the two mighty lands.
Rejoice, ye people of his time. The
Asiatics will fall to his sword, and the
Libyans will fall to his flame. The
rebels belong to his wrath, and the
treacherous in heart belong to the awe
of him.
The man who would fulfill this
prophecy, or rather, the man in whose
reign the prophecy was more likely
written, would reunite Egypt and usher in
a new age of stability.
His name was Nebhepetre Mentuhotep II.
Mentuhotep was a king in the city of
Thebes in Upper Egypt.
Sitting on the eastern bank of the
Nile, about eight hundred kilometers from the
Mediterranean, Thebes is one of the sunniest
and driest cities in the world. It had been
the capital of its own province
throughout the Old Kingdom, but had
always been something of a backwater and
somewhat influenced by the African
culture of Nubia.
But during the more than a century
of chaos that surrounded the collapse of
the Old Kingdom, Thebes slowly grew to
become the capital of the south, and its
kings began referring to themselves as
the great overlord of Upper Egypt.
It was a city where tightly-packed
rows of houses, granaries, and workshops
clustered around the central temple to
the god Amun,
and its people clearly sought a
break from the suffocating influence of
the kings in Memphis.
But in the north, near the
traditional center of Egyptian power, an
ambitious and ruthless rival was also
amassing its forces.
This was centered around the city
of Henen-Nesut in Lower Egypt, in the verdant
region between the river Nile and
the great lake at Faiyum, a region that the
desert Thebans dismissively called  the
marshlands . This city would later be
known as Heracleopolis, or  the city of
Hercules . For about a hundred years during
this time of dissolution, Thebes and
Henen-Nesut had fought bitter wars over
small border regions, forts, and roads, but
neither side could ever gain the upper
hand. That was until the reign of the
king of Thebes, Mentuhotep.
He was named after the Theban god of
war, and came from a line of warlike
kings. He clearly desired to bring this
series of conflicts to a decisive
conclusion and reunite the fractured
kingdom of old.
The final confrontation between
north and south would be sparked
by a rebellion in the city of Thinis, once
home to King Narmer, and which was now one
of the vassals of Thebes.
Delighted by this development,
the northern power of Henen-Nesut seized
the opportunity, and marched south into
the desert to capture the
town. War soon raged across all
Egypt. At one point, the northerners
pushed south and captured the ancient,
sacred city of Abydos, and there
unleashed a wave of destruction against
its temples and palaces.
One later text known as the
Instruction to Merikare purports to be
written by a king of northern Henen-Nesut,
who is racked with guilt for the
destruction of this sacred city.
Lo, a shameful deed occurred in my
time; the province of Theese was ravaged.
Though it happened through my doing, I
learned it after it was done. There was
retribution for what I had done, for it
is evil to destroy.
Beware of it! A blow is repaid by its
like. To every action, there is a response.
This response would come in the
form of a thundering reprisal by the
king of Thebes, Mentuhotep.
He would march into the north and
defeat the armies of Henen-Nesut.
Next, he rounded on the northern
capital. When he captured it, all of the
funerary monuments of its kings were
defaced and destroyed, perhaps suggesting
a sacking of the city. Whatever the
northerners had done to the sacred
center of Abydos, it was clearly visited
upon them and their city
tenfold. Mentuhotep now swept through
Northern Egypt, and the provincial
governors saw the writing on the wall,
and swore fealty to him. After nearly two
centuries of dissolution, the two halves
of Egypt were once again united.
The period that followed, known as the
Middle Kingdom of Egypt, would last for
around three hundred years, but it has not
left an impressive archaeological
record. Compared to the towering pyramids
of the Old Kingdom and the architectural
magnificence of the later New Kingdom, it
stands out as something of a dull time
for grand monument construction.
But it did experience a
flourishing in another area; that is, in
the realm of Egyptian
literature. One famous story written
around this time is called the Tale of
Sinuhe. It narrates the life of a man who
traveled north into Palestine and beyond,
but who eventually becomes homesick and
decides to return to Egypt.
Another collection of stories was
written around this time, a kind of
ancient Arabian Nights, known as the
Tales of Wonder.
It relates a number of
fantastical stories, imagining that they
were told to the great Pharaoh Khufu of
the Old Kingdom by his three sons.
Another story written during the
Middle Kingdom is known as the Tale of
the Shipwrecked Sailor, a kind of ancient
Gulliver s Travels. It is remarkable for
its innovative structure, a tale within a
tale about a sailor shipwrecked in the
Mediterranean who finds himself on an
island ruled by a gigantic serpent.
A storm came up, with us on the
open sea, and no chance for us to reach
harbor. The wind grew sharp and made a
constant moaning, and there were hungry
fourteen-foot-high waves.
A piece of wood of some sort hit
me, and then the ship was dead.
Of all those fine men, not a one
survived. Then I was carried to a desert
island by a swell of the great green sea.
The man speaks with the great serpent,
who tells him a sad story of his own,
that his whole family was killed when a
star fell to Earth. The serpent tells the
man not to fear, that a ship will
eventually pass by the island and rescue
him, and reassures him that he will soon
have a great story to tell.
Now, you are going to spend one
month, and then another, until you finish
four months on this island; then a ship
will come from Egypt with sailors in it
whom you know, that you may go with them
toward home and die in your own city.
What joy for one who lives, to tell
the things he has been through when the
suffering is over!
Finally, the predicted ship arrives, and
the man is rescued.
At last the ship arrived just as
he had foretold. I climbed a lofty tree
and recognized the sailors in the ship,
and went running to report it.
Then I descended to the shore near where
the ship was. I hailed the crew and offered
thanks beside the sea to the Lord of
the Isle, and those on board did likewise.
We have examples of myths and
legends written before this time, and
religious texts, but this is not the
story of some bygone king or the actions
of the gods. It's a story about an
ordinary man in a fantastical situation,
told seemingly just for the
entertainment value of telling a story,
and for that reason, it is possibly the
first true piece of literature. It was likely
written around the year 1900 BC, and is
therefore nearly four thousand years old.
The lives of Egypt's pharaohs take up so
much of the usual discussion of its
history partly because they are the ones
who commissioned the inscriptions, the
monuments, and the statues. But as the
Middle Kingdom's flourishing of
literature continued, we get more and
more of a sense of what life was like
for ordinary people in the Nile
Valley. One text of this period
known as the Papyrus Lansing gives a
fascinating insight into the lives of
Egypt's common people.
It is written as a piece of
rhetoric by a master scribe to one of
his pupils, attempting to convince him to
become a scribe in turn, and from
this, we get a wonderful impression
of all the ways that people could
make their living in the land of Egypt.
Young fellow writing, to him who
knows it, is more profitable than any
profession. It is pleasanter than bread
and beer, than clothing, than oil. Yes, it
is more precious than an inheritance in
Egypt, than a tomb in the west. Look for
thyself with your own eye; here, all the
professions are set before you.
The washer-man spends the whole day going
up and down, every limb of his is a-weary,
whitening the clothes of his neighbors
every day.
The potter is smeared with mud, like
a man in mourning; his hands and feet are
full of clay. He is like one who lives in
the bog.
The cobbler mixes tanning lotions;
his odor is marked, his hands are red
with dye, like one who is smeared with
his blood.
The florist makes bouquets and
makes the wine jar stands beautiful; he
spends a night of toil sweating, like one
on whose body the sun is shining.
The merchants fare downstream and
upstream, and are as busy as can be,
carrying wares from one town to another,
and supplying him that hath not.
If thou hast any
sense, be a scribe.
Whether or not daily life was truly that
bad for all these other workers, we can't
tell, because of course, none of them
wrote down how they felt.
Most of Egypt's people were peasant
farmers, and even when they practiced
these other professions, they likely
engaged in some farming, too.
These peasants did not own the land they
worked, and were required to give most of
the food they produced to the crown or
to their local temple.
To supplement their diets, most
houses kept private kitchen gardens, too,
which the women would tend while the men
went out to the fields.
Egyptian women were also
responsible for baking the bread they
ate every day.
Bread in Egypt was made primarily
with emmer wheat. Dough was often pressed
into clay molds and baked, and at times,
people got creative, baking bread in
spirals like the cinnamon swirl, and using
shaped molds to bake loaves in the form
of animals.
Those who could afford it also
baked cakes and pastries out of the
finest flour, sweetened with dates and
honey. Alongside
their bread, Egyptians ate a
varied diet including garlic and spring
onions, lettuce, celery, cucumbers, gourds,
and melons.
They supplemented these with high-
protein beans and pulses, like lentils
and chickpeas, and a kind of edible tuber
known as a tiger nut that grows at the
base of wetland sedges.
All of this was cooked in olive
oil, at least from the time the
pyramids were built.
At times, they would also eat meat,
primarily beef, lamb, pork, and goat, as
well as quail, pigeon, duck, geese, and
partridge. Mice were even eaten at times,
and even hedgehogs.
The Egyptians cooked these
spiky creatures by wrapping them in wet
clay and baking them in it, and when the
clay was cracked open afterwards, it took
the hedgehog's spines with it. The
Egyptians also made cheese and even foie gras,
made from force-feeding geese.
One text written by a scribe to
the queen Nefertari urges people to
share with others the food they have.
Do not eat bread while another
stands by without extending your hand to
him. As to food, it is here always. It
is man who does not last; one man is rich,
another is poor, but food remains for him
who shares it.
Beer was exceptionally popular in
Egypt, and people consumed it daily. As a
result, breweries were important centers
of industry.
Beer was thought to have been
given to Egypt by the goddess Hathor, the
goddess of beauty, music, and dancing, and
breweries were watched over by the
goddess Tenenet; so, fittingly, many beer
factories were run by women. Some of
these were enormous and were capable of
brewing more than a million liters a
year. They used large pottery vats
propped up on mud bricks over crackling
fires, and inside these they heated
barley and water, then left the mixture
to ferment before flavoring the brew
with honey and syrups made of dates and
other fruit.
There was even one annual festival
called the Tekh Festival, that would
become known as  the Festival of
Drunkenness . During this fiesta, Egyptians
would drink as much beer as they could,
and then fall asleep together in a large
hall. They would then be awoken all
together by the loud beating of drums. It
was said that in the moment just after
waking, some of them would meet the
goddess Hathor herself.
Egypt was one of the most stable
and prosperous agricultural societies in
the ancient world, but it was a society
built entirely on the collection and
storage of grain. As a result, there was
one ever-present danger; that was the
presence of mice and rats.
Grain was stored in large circular
granaries within the towns, shaped like
beehives, and freshly-harvested wheat or
barley was poured in through a hole in
the top to be preserved in the hot, dry
air. When grain was needed for bread-
making or beer-brewing, it was taken from
a small door in the bottom of these
granaries. But if mice got into this storage
or even ate the grain while it was still
in the fields, then thousands of hours of
work could be wasted, and people might
even starve.
But thankfully, Egyptians were
able to rely on one particular set of
allies; that was the domestic cat.
There were two major breeds of wild
cat native to Egypt; the jungle cat, or
Felis chaus, and the African wild cat,
Felis silvestris lybica.
Of these, the African wild cat had
something of a calmer temperament, and so,
was most commonly bred as a pet, with
evidence of their domestication in Egypt
from at least five thousand years ago.
These cats were kept around Egyptian
settlements for their obvious utility
both in controlling mice and with their
almost supernatural reflexes for their
ability to kill venomous snakes.
But it's clear that the Egyptians
also enjoyed their company, and even
loved them.
Some particularly beloved pets were
buried with tiny offerings intended to
serve them well in the cat afterlife.
The Greek writer Diodorus of Sicily
recalls seeing Egyptians performing
burial ceremonies for their cats.
When one of these animals dies, they
wrap it in fine linen, and then, wailing
and beating their breasts, carry it off
to be embalmed, and after it has been
treated with cedar oil and such spices
as have the quality of imparting a
pleasant odor and of preserving the body
for a long time, they lay it away in a
consecrated tomb.
While the earliest domestication of the
house cat took place elsewhere in the
fertile crescent, it was in Egypt that it
accelerated dramatically.
As cats got used to their
new survival niche, they in turn began to
adapt. They largely lost their original
camouflage coatings, became smaller, and
even developed new ways of signaling to
their human patrons with soft insistent
cries, modulated
to similar frequencies as a
human baby.
Fittingly, the Egyptian word for  cat
was  miu .
Over time, this adoration of their
feline companions seems to have become a
religious reverence, too.
With their ease and grace, cats in
Egypt were associated with femininity,
and paintings in tombs often show the
house household dog sitting below a
man's chair while a cat sits under the
woman's chair.
One goddess named Bastet would
soon become revered, and she manifested
as a woman with the head of a house
cat. Bastet became a god of fertility, and
women would appeal to her during times
of childbirth and pregnancy.
Diodorus later records seeing
an Egyptian festival during which cats
were ritually fed.
For the cats, they break up bread
into milk, and calling them with a
clucking sound, set it before them, or
else they cut up fish caught in the Nile
and feed the flesh to them raw. All who
meet these animals fall down before them
and render them with honor.
The Egyptians were also fiercely
protective of their feline companions, as
Diodorus recounts.
Whoever kills a cat, whether
intentionally or unintentionally,
he is certainly put to death,
for common people gather in crowds
and deal with the perpetrator most
cruelly, sometimes doing this without
waiting for a trial.
The worship and veneration of cats
would continue throughout all the
thousands of years of Ancient Egyptian
history, and for the cats, it is perhaps
something that they have never
quite forgotten.
The Middle Kingdom was not
just a time of entertainment and
pleasure. With the mania for pyramid-
building somewhat subsided, certain
pharaohs engaged in large-scale
construction projects to strengthen and
develop the empire. One king spent much
of his life on a vast irrigation project
around the oasis at Faiyum, determined to
turn it into a productive swathe of farmland.
Another built a large series of
defensive walls in the Nile Delta,
hemming Egypt off from the people of the
wider Middle East, whom the Egyptians
called Asiatics.
These people were often
depicted in their paintings with lighter,
more yellowish skin than the Egyptians,
and were held in general contempt as
uncivilized barbarians.
The Egyptians soon began
pushing their sphere of influence into
this area, expanding their territory
north along the Mediterranean coast and
into Palestine. They crossed the Sinai
Desert and subjugated the Phoenician
city of Byblos. Then they turned their
attention south to Eastern Africa, what
the Egyptians called  the horizon lands ,
the lands of the Nubians.
Like the light-skinned Asiatics in the
north, the Egyptians considered the
southern Nubians different to them, and
usually depicted them with darker skin
than Egyptians, and more typically
African features. At this time, these
kingdoms were relatively underdeveloped,
and were easy prey for an aggressive and
expansionist Egypt.
We've already seen that the first
cataract of the Nile was at Aswan, where
the granite bedrock forced the water
into a series of rushing whitewater
rapids. If an Ancient Egyptian traveled
upriver beyond Aswan and into the
horizon lands, they would encounter five
more major cataracts of the Nile.
These are each places where the
river becomes shallow and travel by boat
becomes difficult, and so, there were
natural stops along any journey upriver.
They were also the obvious place to draw
borders. During the Middle Kingdom, Egypt
marched into the horizon lands multiple
times, and pushed its southern border as
far as the second cataract.
Around the 1860s BC, one Middle
Kingdom king named Senusret III marched
even further south into the Nubian
kingdoms of Kush and Punt. He
remembers this brutal campaign in one
inscription. The Nubians are wretches,
craven-hearted. My Majesty has seen it; it
is not an untruth. I have captured their
women, I have carried off their subjects,
poisoned their wells, killed their cattle,
cut down their grain, set fire to it.
In this remorseless fashion, Senusret
marched beyond the second cataract and
built a powerful set of fortresses.
We get a sense for their
purpose from the names the Egyptians
gave to them. One of them at Askut was
named  Crushing the Nubians , while another
at Shalfak was named  Subduing the Foreign
Lands . In another imposing fortress at
Semna, now more than four hundred kilometers
upstream from the former border of Aswan,
Senusret left a stone monument with the
following triumphant inscription.
Year 16, third month of winter;
the king made his southern
boundary. I have made my boundary further
south than my father's. I have added to
what was bequeathed me. As for any son of
mine, who shall maintain this border
which my Majesty has made, he is my son.
But he who abandons it, who fails to
fight for it, he is not my son. He was not
born to me.
These forts were manned by powerful
units of Egyptian soldiers tasked with
keeping order among the newly-colonized
Nubians. To this end, they engaged in a
paranoid surveillance regime of the
local people.
To the pharaoh Senusret, they sent back
constant updates on papyrus scrolls
about the movements of even the most
minute groups of Nubians, some of which
have survived.
The patrol who went forth to
patrol the desert edge from the fortress
Khesef-Medja ew in year 3, month three of the
growing season, have come to report to me
saying, we have found the tracks of thirty-two
men and three donkeys.
All these dispatches end in the same way,
with the same comforting offer of
reassurance to the king.
All the affairs of the king's domain
are safe and sound. All the affairs
of the master are safe and sound.
But we have reason to believe that
King Senusret was not entirely
reassured. He is famous for the numerous
sculptures he had made of himself,
statues carved from black diorite that
depict him in strangely realistic
fashion, unlike any depictions of a
pharaoh that had come before. In these
statues, his ears are extended to
enormous proportions like a bat, perhaps
projecting the image of a king who heard
every movement in his kingdom, relayed by
his extensive system of spies.
Three of these statues in
particular show the king first as a boy,
then as a man, and finally in old age. In
this final statue, we get a sense for the
mental toll it took on a man to sit at
the top of this paranoid system; the
pharaoh's weary sunken eyes, his haggard
face contorted in an expression of
eternal worry.
Today, these three statues stand as
a kind of metaphor for the state the
Egyptian Middle Kingdom had sunk into
during during its final decades.
Senusret's son, Amenemhat III, did
just as his father's inscriptions had
urged, and held the southern border
against the Nubians.
But following his reign, Egypt
was once more plunged into a succession
crisis. The crisis was so severe that
their next king was something that had
until then been almost unthinkable; a
woman. Her name
was Sobekneferu, possibly the
daughter, sister, or wife of the previous
pharaoh. She was probably not the first
woman to hold power in Egypt, but she was
the first one to attain the full
official title of a king. Sobekneferu used
masculine titles in her inscriptions, and
one statue of her even shows her wearing
an unconventional mixture of male and
female clothing.
However, she did not succeed in
slowing the dynasty's decline.
She died after ruling for only four
years, and did not leave any heirs.
After that, the serpent Isfet
uncoiled once more, and Egypt slid into chaos.
During the time that followed,
known as the Second Intermediate Period,
there were 150 years during which at
least fifty kings ruled.
Egypt once again split in two, and
local governors stopped mentioning the
king in their tomb inscriptions.
The pyramids of this period
had already become small and meager,
mostly built from mud brick, but now
their construction stopped altogether.
Some kings were even buried in
simple shaft tombs, little better than
commoners. Much of the Nile Delta of
Lower Egypt had already broken away from
the empire, and now in the south, the
people of Nubia were in open
rebellion. One by one, the Egyptians were
forced to let go of their southern forts,
abandoning them to the
Nubians. Once a symbol of the empire's
confidence, these powerful fortresses now
became unprecedented military assets for
their enemies, and bases from which
powerful raiding parties ranged ever
farther into Egypt. The cruelty that the
Egyptians had shown to their Nubian
neighbors was now being paid back in
full. With the northern and southern
borders convulsed in conflict, Egypt's
trade links with the rest of the world
were severely disrupted.
It was also during this time
or perhaps later that the entire
Mediterranean, in fact,
most of the world, witnessed one
of the largest natural disasters in
human history.
That is the eruption of the
volcano Thera, now known as the Greek
island of Santorini, only seven hundred
kilometers from the Egyptian coast.
It's likely that the Egyptians
would have heard the deep boom of this
explosion, which went off with the force
of several hundred atomic bombs.
When the Indonesian volcano Krakatoa
erupted in 1883, the explosion was heard
more than three thousand kilometers away,
and it s thought that the Thera explosion
was at least four times more
powerful. Today, the seawater-filled
volcanic crater left by the eruption is
more than ten kilometers wide.
This event may have ejected more than forty
square kilometers of rock into the
atmosphere. The black plume would have
been riven with volcanic lightning, and
it would have triggered tsunamis ten meters
high that would have devastated coastal
regions, as well as causing a volcanic
winter. The eruption may have wiped out
the Minoan civilization on Crete in one
blow, perhaps inspiring part of the
Atlantis myth, and
chronicles as far away as China
record a period when the sky turned a
strange yellow color, and crop yields
fell. One Egyptian inscription known as
the Tempest Stelae may record some memory
of this terrifying event.
The gods expressed their discontent.
The gods made the sky come
with a tempest. It caused darkness in the
western region. The sky was unleashed,
more powerful on the mountains than the
turbulence of the cataract at Aswan.
Each house, each shelter that they
reached, were floating in the water like the
barks of papyrus outside the royal
residence for days.
Volcanic ash, or tephra, would have
begun to rain down on the whole region,
and today could be detected at virtually
every site in the Eastern Mediterranean.
Spurred by this natural disaster and
exacerbated by the collapse of the
Egyptian administration, soon famine once
more descended on the land.
Among all of this, a powerful and
mysterious force of outsiders must have
been watching.
They came from the Eastern
Mediterranean region from across the
Sinai Desert, and they intended to
conquer Egypt and rule it for themselves.
These people were known as the Hyksos.
The word  Hyksos  comes from the
Egyptian phrase  hekau khasut , meaning  rulers
of foreign lands .
Where exactly the Hyksos were from
is unknown, but it's thought they may
have originated in the region of Syria,
and one thing seems to have been behind
their great military success,
and that was the chariot.
At this point, some form of
chariot had been used by various
societies for many
centuries. Vehicles like a kind of war
cart with four solid, wooden wheels
pulled by donkeys are depicted on the
Sumerian standard of Ur, which was
created around the time that the
pyramids of Giza were being built. But
Egypt had never experimented with this
kind of vehicle, and over the preceding
millennium, the technology had taken huge
leaps forward.
The chariots that the Hyksos
brought into Egypt for the first time
had two wheels with spokes, light and
fast, and they were each pulled by two
powerful animals that had been recently
introduced to the region, the horse.
These chariots were strong and mobile
battle platforms that could break enemy
battle lines, while onboard archers with
powerful bows could pelt enemies with
missiles. Whether the Hyksos arrived in
Egypt as a violent invasion or a more
peaceful migration is somewhat up for
debate. People from the north have been
settling in the Nile Delta for centuries,
and much of the population there was
already what the Egyptians would
consider foreign by the time the Hyksos
rulers arrived. But the Hyksos were
clearly not pacifists.
They set up their own kingdom
in the Nile Delta, with its capital at
Avaris, and in a devastating blow to
Egyptian morale, even swept south to
capture the ancient capital of Memphis.
One much later source named Manetho
records the arrival of the Hyksos.
By main force, they easily seized the
country without striking a blow, and
having overpowered the rulers of the
land, they then burned our cities
ruthlessly, razed to the ground the
temples of the gods.
Finally, they appointed as king one
of the number he had his seat at Memphis,
levying tribute from Upper and Lower
Egypt, and always leaving garrisons behind
in the most advantageous positions.
The pyramids, that great symbol
of Egyptian prestige, were now in foreign
hands. Egyptian kings would now retreat
back to their former capital in Upper
Egypt, the city of Thebes.
With the Nubians increasingly
powerful in the south, and now the new
threat of these Hyksos kings looming from
the north, the weakened Egyptians
increasingly felt like they were being
crushed in a vice.
For a time, it must have seemed like the
age of an independent Egypt was over.
One king named Kamose, who came to
the throne of Thebes around 1555 BC,
would put this intolerable situation in
the following terms.
I should like to know what serves
this strength of mine when a chieftain
is in Avaris and another in Kush, and I
sit united with an Asiatic and a Nubian,
each in possession of his slice of Egypt,
and I cannot pass by him as far as
Memphis. No man can settle down when
despoiled by the taxes of the Asiatics.
I will grapple with him, that I may rip
open his belly! My wish is to save Egypt
and to smite the Asiatic!
King Kamose may have had a very personal
reason to hate the Hyksos.
The mummified remains of the
previous pharaoh, his father, have been
uncovered, and modern analysis shows that
he suffered brutal wounds to the head
from a heavy, bladed weapon. These blows
must have sliced his cheek and fractured
his jaw and skull, leading many to
conclude that he died on the battlefield.
The king's body was then rushed back to
Thebes, where it was hastily
mummified. If Prince Kamose saw his
father's body in this state as it was
carried back into the city, we can only
imagine the kind of hatred that must
have burned in his heart towards the
Hyksos invaders in the north.
But many in Kamose's court were
clearly afraid of what a war with the
Hyksos would do to the fragile state of
the country.
One text known as the Carnarvon Tablet
describes how they appealed to their king
to maintain the peace.
We are tranquil in our part of
Egypt. Aswan at the first cataract is
strong, and the middle part of the land
is with us. Men till for us the finest of
their lands. They allow our cattle to
pasture in the papyrus marshes. Corn is
sent for our swine. Our cattle are not
taken away. He holds the land of the
Asiatics; we hold Egypt. Only when one
comes against us, should we act against him.
But Kamose refused.
He wanted to strike a blow at
the Hyksos, but he knew that he would have
to secure the southern border first and
recapture the old fortress of Buhen, just
before the second cataract of the Nile.
Buhen was one of the strong-walled
bastions built by Senusret III, and it was
one of the only forts the Egyptians
built from stone rather than brick. But
since the collapse of the Middle Kingdom,
its garrison had served a Nubian lord
from the kingdom of Kush.
If the southern border was to hold
while Kamose expelled the Hyksos in the
north, he would need to recapture the
fort of Buhen.
Kamose marched south, preparing to
assault the fort, but it seems that upon
sighting the enormous Egyptian army on
the horizon, the citizens of the fortress
got the message and decided to swear
allegiance to the pharaoh without a
fight. With this powerful fort now
holding the south, Kamose marched back to
Thebes and prepared for the next
campaign season, when he would seek to
bring war to the Hyksos and unite Egypt
once more.
In the third year of his reign,
Kamose struck.
I sailed north in my might to
repel the Asiatics through the command
of Amun, with my brave army before me
like a flame of fire and the archers
atop our fighting decks.
Kamose's fleet descended swiftly on
the Hyksos in what appears to have been
something of a surprise attack. Caught
off guard, the foreigners were defeated
and the vengeance of Kamose was terrible.
When day dawned, I was upon him
as if it were a hawk. When breakfast time
came, I overthrew him, having destroyed
his walls and slaughtered his people, and
made his wife descend to the river bank.
My army acted like lions with their
spoil   chattels, cattle, fat, honey   dividing
their things, their hearts joyful.
As for Avaris on the two rivers, I laid
it waste without inhabitants; I destroyed
their towns and burned their homes to
reddened ruin-heaps
forever, because of the destruction they
had wrought in the midst of Egypt; they
who had allowed themselves to hearken to
the call of the Asiatics, had forsaken
Egypt, their mistress.
The king of the Hyksos
immediately appealed to his Nubian ally,
the king of Kush, for help. At one point,
the Egyptians intercepted a secret
message traveling south along the desert
roads, the contents of which they recorded.
Have you noticed what Egypt has
done against me? The ruler who is there,
Kamose, penetrates my territory even
though I have not attacked him as he has
you. He chooses these two lands in
order to afflict them, my land and yours,
and he has ravaged them. Come northward;
do not flinch. Then we shall divide up
the towns of Egypt.
When this messenger returned to
the embattled Hyksos king, shamefaced and
with the letter undelivered, he must have
known that all was lost. The war
came to a swift end, and Kamose
recounts, with perhaps some exaggeration,
his heroic return to Thebes.
What a happy home trip for the
ruler! Life! Prosperity! Happiness! With his
army ahead of him! They had no casualties,
nor did anyone blame his fellow, nor did
their hearts weep! I moored on home soil
during the season of inundation; the
riverbank was resplendent! Thebes was
festive; women and men had come to see me,
every woman hugged her neighbor, no one
was tearful.
His son Ahmose would press this
advantage, and in an even more
devastating campaign, seized the ancient
capital of Memphis.
Ahmose would be the first
pharaoh in at least a hundred years to
recapture the great pyramids of Giza, and
we can imagine imagine his feelings as
he gazed up at the monuments of his
ancestors Khufu and Khafre, by now already
more than a thousand years old.
It's clear that the site inspired him,
and he would even build a pyramid of
his own in Upper Egypt at the site of
Abydos. This was one of the first
pyramids built for an Egyptian pharaoh
since the fall of the Middle Kingdom, and
it was clearly designed as a symbol of
renewal of the empire's great legacy.
But it would also be the last ever
pyramid built by an Egyptian ruler.
After securing the Nile Delta,
Ahmose marched north and even crossed the
Sinai, smashing through the traditional
heartland of the Hyksos people, and seizing
territory in Palestine in the region of
modern Gaza.
After that, he returned to the
southern people of Kush, and pushed the
empire's borders farther south than they
had ever been,
beyond the second cataract to the river
island of Sai, now in northern
Sudan. From its lowest ebb, Egypt had
suddenly reemerged as a major regional
power. This was the age of the
New Kingdom.
During the five centuries of the New
Kingdom, Egypt would reach its greatest
territorial extent and construct some of
its most impressive monuments and
artifacts. Despite recapturing Memphis,
its kings saw no reason to move the
capital again, and so they now once again
ruled from the city of Thebes, far up
the river in Upper Egypt.
By now, Egypt had also adopted the
technology of the horse-drawn chariot from
their Hyksos foes, and its armies were now
made up of powerful contingents of these
vehicles. During these centuries, Egypt
saw the rule of its first great woman
pharaoh, Hatshepsut, who was one of its
most prolific builders. She constructed the
towering temple complex at Karnak and the
stately mortuary temple known as the
Holy of Holies. She also undertook a
voyage in five ships to the land of Punt,
somewhere in Africa, and brought back
incense trees and other goods to Egypt,
which she celebrated in one inscription.
The ships returned with the
marvels of the land of Punt and with all
the good woods of Ta-Netjer, with heaps of
incense, with trees producing green
fragrance, with ebony and pure ivory,
with gold and green agates found in the
land of the Amu, with hides of the
panthers of the south. Never since the
beginning of the world have the like of
these wonders been brought by any king.
The New Kingdom would also see some
of the most striking dramas emerge in
the royal courts of Egypt. Of these, none
have drawn so much attention as the
story of one pharaoh. He has been
described by some as a revolutionary, by
others as a visionary, and by others
still as simply insane.
He was a ruler named Amunhotep IV.
Amunhotep came to the throne around
1350 BC. He had inherited his name from
his father, who had ruled as Amunhotep III.
Like most Egyptian names, it
included the name of a god, Amun, and it
meant  Amun is satisfied .
Amun had long been the god of
the city of Thebes, and was considered
the god of fertility and of the wind. But
when the Hyksos were expelled from Egypt
and Thebes became the capital once more,
this god Amun was given something of a
promotion. He was unified with the
sun god Ra to create a compound deity
now known as Amun-Ra, the perfect symbol
of the power of a new united Egypt.
Amun-Ra was depicted as a man
bearing a golden staff and wearing a
high crown, and later would be shown with
blue skin.
This new deity was placed at the
head of all the various gods that
the Egyptians worshiped; the king of the
gods and creator of the universe.
One hymn to Amun-Ra describes
the primacy of his position.
Lord of truth, father of the
gods, maker of men, creator of all animals,
lord of things that are, creator of the
staff of life.
The pharaoh Amunhotep IV would
keep his name for the first four years
of his rule, but around his fifth year on
the throne, he made the unprecedented
decision to change his royal name. That's
because he had a vision of a new system
of belief that he wanted to spread over
all of Egypt. He wanted to do away with
the messiness of Egyptian religion and
the system of different gods in
different cities, different temples and
cults and priests. He devised a new
system of worship that focused not on
any god but on the sun itself, which he
seems to have believed was his true
father. This new god would be depicted as
a bare, impersonal disc showering the
Earth with beams of light. It would be
called simply the orb, or in Egyptian, the
Aten. One surviving hymn to the Aten,
perhaps even written by the pharaoh
himself, shows the enormous power this
new god was supposed to have.
O sole god, like whom there is no
other, thou didst create the world
according to thy desire.
You are in my heart; there is no
other who knows you. Every land chatters
at his rising every day.
Around year five of his reign, the
pharaoh Amunhotep abandoned his old
name that paid respect to the god Amun,
and changed it to a new name for his new
god. This new name meant  effective spirit
for the Aten .
He was now the pharaoh Akhenaten.
Akhenaten is the first recorded
person in history to have started a new
religion by himself. He was also the
first monotheist.
In Akhenaten s kingdom, only the
Aten could be worshiped. Temples to Amun
were eventually shut down, and all
worship of the former god was banned. The
king even sent out workmen and soldiers
to all corners of Egypt, where they burst
into temples with hammers and chisels,
and chipped the name of Amun off the
walls. His determination to rid his
kingdom of Amun was so great that he
even sent workmen climbing to the top of
the red pyramid of Sneferu to chip the
name of Amun from the pyramid's topmost
capstone. To the Egyptians, used as they
were to placating a whole host of deities
with prayers and offerings, this radical
shift must have seemed like a
frightening and risky gamble. Many must
have feared to turn their backs on their
old, trusted gods and consort with this
new and untested ideology.
But the king's word was the
king's word, and for the most part, they
seem to have fallen into line.
At first, Akhenaten converted old
temples in Thebes to the Aten, and even
began constructing some new ones, but he
soon went off the idea.
Thebes' old temples were
covered with carvings and hieroglyphs
praising the other gods, and the depth of
their history couldn't be erased
overnight. Thebes was also home to a
powerful priestly class that resisted
his reforms.
In answer to this problem, Akhenaten
took the remarkable decision to build an
entirely new capital. He would build it
out in the middle of the desert, at a
completely uninhabited location halfway
between Memphis and Thebes. He would
call this city  the horizon of the Aten ,
or in Egyptian, Akhetaten.
Standing out on the bare and level
plain where he hoped to build his new
city, the pharaoh Akhenaten gave the
following proclamation to his courtiers.
The Aten desires that there
be made for him a monument with an
eternal and everlasting name.
It is Aten, my father, who gave me
counsel concerning it. No official has
ever given me counsel, not any of the
people who are in the entire land.
At Akhetaten, I shall make the house
of Aten.
This new city would be furnished
with everything a royal capital needed;
palaces for Akhenaten and his chief wife
Nefertiti, along with his four other wives,
gardens, tombs, administrative buildings,
and workshops, and of course, a vast
temple complex to the new god, Aten.
Construction of this city would
take at least eight years, and when it was
finished, in the twelfth year of his reign,
Akhenaten held a magnificent
ceremony. The year was 1342 BC.
At his new capital, Akhenaten received
delegations from all over the region,
from the Hittites, from Syria and islands
in the Mediterranean like Cyprus and
Crete, as well as from the Nubian lands
of Punt and Kush in the south, all here
to bear witness to the glory of his new
city and his successful conversion of
his empire.
The priests may have grumbled,
the common people may have fretted, but he
had finally done it. The ceremony must
have been grand, full of celebration and
pomp, musicians and dancers, the burning
of incense, and feasts of fine foods.
We can imagine the foreign guests
listening to the singing of hymns like
the following to the new god, Aten.
Thou didst create the world
according to thy desire; all men, cattle,
and wild beasts, whatever is on Earth
going upon its feet, and what is on high,
flying with its wings. The countries of
Syria and Nubia, the land of Egypt, thou
settest every man in his place, thou suppliest their necessities.
Their tongues are separate in speech, and their natures as well.
Every one has his food, and his time of life is reckoned.
But the consequences of this piece
of royal pageantry were dire. A
plague had been spreading around the
Middle East for some time now, affecting
lands in Syria and the Hittite Empire in
what is now Turkey.
One group of texts written around
this time, known as the Hittite Plague
Prayers, invoke the gods to deliver them
from this disaster.
For twenty years now, people have
been dying in Hatti. Will the plague never
be removed from Hatti? I cannot control
the worry in my heart. I can no longer
control the anguish of my soul.
With foreign dignitaries coming
from all over the region with large
entourages and doubtless groups of
slaves in tow, a deadly dose of this
disease arrived that year in the heart
of Egypt, and from there would have
spread all up and down the Nile. If
Akhenaten had hoped that this ceremony
would secure his people's confidence in
his new god, then it couldn't have
backfired more dramatically.
In the pandemic that
followed, no one was safe. Numerous deaths
may even have occurred within Akhenaten's
family, perhaps including his
mother, his wife, and three of his
daughters. If the situation was so
severe, even in the relatively protected
royal court, we can assume that in the
population at large, the effects were
even more devastating. For the people of
Egypt, this incomprehensible disaster
must have seemed like the judgment of
the old gods on the man who had so
arrogantly turned his back on them.
Akhenaten died only a few years later,
around 1335 BC, after seventeen years of
rule. After his death, some members of his
family attempted to maintain the cult of
the Aten in the now plague-ravaged new
capital of Akhetaten.
They would take turns to rule for
the next four years, but seemingly without
much success.
Now, the whole empire seemed like
it was teetering on the brink of
collapse. But eventually, one of Akhenaten s
sons, a boy of only eight years old,
came to the throne.
His father had given him the
hopeful name Tutankh-Aten, or  living
image of the Aten , but he would not rule
under it for long. Turning his back on
his father's new faith and to enormous
celebration around the empire, in the
third year of his rule, he changed his
name to the one we now remember him
by, the living image not of Aten, but of
the old god Amun, now triumphantly
welcomed back by the people of Egypt.
His name was Tutankh-Amun.
As symbolized by his change of name,
the boy king Tutankh-Amun rowed back a great
number of his father's attempted reforms.
He ended all worship of the god Aten,
and reinstated Amun to supremacy in
Thebes. Tutankh-Amun lifted the ban on the
cults of other gods, and restored the
traditional privileges of the
priesthood. Many temples to the Aten in
Thebes and elsewhere were torn down, and
their painted bricks were used as filler
in the walls of other temples.
Everyone seemed to be in agreement; the
whole sorry business of Akhenaten was
better off forgotten.
Today, the boy king Tutankh-Amun
is perhaps the most famous of all the
Egyptian pharaohs, more famous than the
great Khufu and Khafre of Giza, or the
pharaoh's Djoser and Sneferu, who perfected
the pyramid form. He's more famous than
Kamose or Ahmose,
who reunited the kingdom and expelled
the Hyksos, more famous than his colorful
father Akhenaten or the great queen
Hatshepsut. But there's nothing in his reign
that really warrants that level of
recognition. In fact, this boy king died
while still a teenager after only nine
years of rule.
He does seem to have been a good
king, and popular, and set Egypt back on
course after his father's erratic reign.
But the source of his fame was really
one of absolute historical
accident. When he died in 1323 BC, the boy
king Tutankh-Amun was buried in a tomb in
the Valley of the Kings. It was not a
particularly resplendent royal tomb, and
a far cry from the glorious pyramids of
the Old Kingdom. But shortly after it was
sealed, there was a chance flash flood in
this portion of the necropolis, and the
doorway to the tomb was buried in sand
and rock. This left it completely
concealed. For the next
3,300 years, tomb robbers would scour the
Valley of the Kings, stealing from nearly
every one of the great pharaoh's tombs,
making away with their treasures,
removing their mummies, and despoiling
their decorations.
But buried in the sand,
Tutankh-Amun s tomb remains sealed.
For this reason, it was completely untouched
until the year 1922,
when it was uncovered by the
Egyptologist Howard Carter, and all its
artifacts were recovered to
international astonishment.
Today, the most glorious of
these, the golden burial mask of Tutankh-Amun,
is one of the most famous objects
from the ancient world, a resplendent
image of royal wealth and power.
At times, it can be hard to
remember that this golden image is also
a portrait of a boy who had power thrust
upon him in a time of upheaval and
strife, looking up at us from the dark
depths of the ages.
The New Kingdom of Egypt would
reach its highest point around fifty years
after the reign of Tutankh-Amun.
It would come during the rule
of perhaps the greatest Egyptian pharaoh.
He came to the throne under the name
Ramesses II, but he would go down in history
as Ramesses the Great.
Ramesses came to the throne at the
age of fourteen, in 1279 BC.
At the time, Egypt's Mediterranean
coast was being ravaged by groups of
pirates, and he spent much of his early
rule dealing with this nuisance. But he
is most famous for pushing the
boundaries of Egypt far to the north
into the region of Syria.
Over the preceding centuries, a
powerful rival had grown up in the
mountains of what is today Turkey, and
was steadily spreading its influence in
all directions.
This was the powerful Hittite
Empire, centered on their hill fortress
capital of Hattusha.
The Hittites were a relatively new
power in the region, but their territory
was wealthy and extensive.
They had mastered the use of
chariots in warfare, turning them from
light hit-and-run vehicles into heavy,
armored shock troops. For the last
two centuries, Egypt had been fighting
increasingly bitter wars with them over
who would control the region of
Palestine. In the fourth year of his
reign, Ramesses II gathered an
expeditionary force and marched across
the Sinai Desert to Gaza, and from there
marched north.
One epic poem written about this
expedition exalts in the enormous force
that Ramesses brought.
His Majesty journeyed northward, his
infantry and chariotry with him. He began
to march on the good way. Every foreign
country was trembling before him. Their
chiefs were bringing their tribute, and
all the rebels were coming, bowing down
through dread of the personality of His
Majesty. Ramesses' aim was to capture the
strong fortress city of Kadesh, situated
along the sandy banks on a fork of the
Orontes River.
For years now, Kadesh had been
playing the Hittites and Egypt off
against one another, allying first with
one, then the other. Now, Ramesses was
determined to finally seize Kadesh for
Egypt. He marched north with four of his
divisions, named after the gods Amun, Ra,
Seth, and Ptah. With him he brought thousands
of chariots, and one unit of elite
chariot riders he sent by sea, telling
them to land on the coast and ride
inland to meet him on the day that he
arrived at Kadesh.
At first, everything seemed to be
going well. On his way, the pharaoh's
scouts captured a pair of tribesmen from
the Shasu people, who told him that the
Hittite king was cowering further to the
north. He was afraid of the might of
Egypt, they said. He had left Kadesh
defenseless. Excited by this news, Ramesses
threw all caution to the wind and
hastened northward to seize the city
with only one of his four divisions, his
prided Amun troops, but this would prove
to be a fatal mistake.
Ramesses didn't know it yet, but
these Shasu tribesmen were actually
agents of the Hittite king sent to lure
him into a trap.
When he arrived at Kadesh, Ramesses set
up his camp beside a stony brook, and his
scouts set out into the surrounding
landscape to detect any threats. Some of
these scouts ran into a pair of Hittite
soldiers who had been lying low in the
undergrowth, watching them. They
skirmished and the Egyptians managed to
capture the Hittites.
After perhaps a stern beating,
these men revealed what lay waiting for
the Egyptians nearby, the full might of
the Hittite armies amassed in an ambush,
hidden behind the looming fortress of
Kadesh. The Kadesh poem records this
imposing force.
Now the wretched foe of Hatti had
come, having gathered all foreign countries
to the very ends of the sea; the land of
Hatti in its entirety. They covered the
mountains and the valleys like the
grasshoppers with their
multitudes. He left neither silver nor
gold in his land, but despoiled it of all
its possessions, and gave them to all
foreign countries to bring them with him
to combat.
Ramesses flew into a rage with his
generals for allowing this to happen. He
had hurried ahead with his Amun division,
and now he was critically overstretched,
with his reinforcements in the Ra
division still on the road.
The Hittites would not allow the
Egyptians to regroup. Before the Ra
division could arrive, a terrifying force
of 2,500 Hittite chariots burst out of
hiding and swept across the river
plain. Hittite chariots were the tanks of
their day, heavy and armored, their riders
covered in chain mail down to their
toes. These chariots rolled in and
smashed into the Ra regiment, who
frantically tried to form a shield wall.
The Hittites scattered this
division completely, and then rounded on
the Egyptians  camp.
Ramesses was surrounded, cut off from
his reinforcements and now
outnumbered. But in this dire situation,
he recounts how he rallied his men and
led them in a desperate charge against
the enemy.
I found the 2,500 spans of
chariotry, in whose midst I was, becoming
heaps of corpses before my horse. Not
one of them found his hand to fight, for
their hearts quailed in their bodies
from terror of me, and all their arms
were powerless so they could not shoot,
nor find their courage to seize their javelins.
Whether or not this self-
aggrandizing account is an accurate
depiction of that day, it's clear that
the tide did begin to turn.
The Egyptian soldiers were elite
fighters, and many of the Hittite forces
may have been mercenaries or
conscripts. After destroying the Ra
division and sweeping into the Egyptians
camp, the chariots became bogged down, and
many of the Hittite soldiers, believing the
battle to be already over, began looting
rather than press their advantage.
More Egyptian reinforcements
were soon arriving from the south, and as
the bloody afternoon wore on, that
contingent of elite charioteers that had
been sailing up the coast also arrived
on the scene.
The arrival of this cavalry on the
horizon was enough to steel the resolve
of the Egyptian troops and break the
will of the Hittites.
Ramesses gives a florid rendition of
what happened next.
I made them plunge into the water
as crocodiles plunge, for they were
falling upon their faces, one on another,
as I slew among them whom I desired.
Neither could one look behind him, nor
could another turn about, and whoever of
them fell, he could not raise himself.
The Hittite army withdrew, with
many of their soldiers pushed into the
Orontes River.
When the next day dawned, the two
sides clashed again, but both had been
fatally weakened by the previous days
fighting. After a few hours of bloody
slaughter, Ramesses withdrew, and the Hittite
king sent him a peace offer.
The pharaoh's hands were tied.
The Egyptians lacked any siege
equipment to breach the strong walls of
Kadesh, and the only option to take the
city would have been a lengthy siege,
during which Ramesses would have found his
forces exposed to attack, poorly supplied,
and prone to encirclement.
Instead, he decided to
declare victory and march back to Egypt.
The Hittites in turn also declared
victory, and the city of Kadesh would
slip out of Ramesses' grasp.
Despite the overflowing praise of
Ramesses and his glorious victory in the
Kadesh poem, the war actually ended with
a stalemate, and the question of the city
remained unresolved.
But it's clear that Ramesses
thought back to his role during the
battle with no small amount of pride, and
he would decorate the walls of his
temple at Abu Simbel with a vast low-
relief carving of every one of the
battle s twists and turns.
The war with the Hittites would
drag on for a further fifteen years, and
during this time, Egypt would often
capture territory along the
Mediterranean coast, only to lose it
again the very next year. Before long,
both sides grew weary of this
grinding conflict.
The war was finally brought to
an end with what has gone down in
history as the first written peace
treaty, the text of which has survived.
Behold, Hattusili, the ruler of the
Hittites, binds himself by treaty to
Ramesses, chosen one of Ra, the great
ruler of Egypt, beginning today, so that
perfect peace and brotherhood may be
created between us forever; he being in
brotherhood and peace with me, and I
being in brotherhood and peace with him
forever. The treaty was written on silver
tablets, with both the Hittites and the
Egyptians being given a copy. Its text
was written in both hieroglyphics and
Hittite cuneiform, but the two
translations do have slightly different
wordings. In a diplomatic stroke of
genius, the Egyptian version claims that
the Hittites had come begging Egypt for
peace, which the Egyptians graciously
accepted, while in the Hittite version, it
is the Egyptians who asked to end the
war. With both sides thus able to save
face, the destructive conflict was
allowed to come to an end, and nearly a
century of relative peace
ensued. Despite the the pride Ramesses took
in his battles, today it is this peace
treaty that we most remember, and a
replica of it hangs on the walls of the
United Nations headquarters in New
York. After what seemed like a lucky
escape at Kadesh, Ramesses would turn his
attention away from war and towards
construction. He spent the next decades
of his rule building temples and
monuments up and down Egypt, and today,
his name is the one that appears on the
most surviving monuments of any
pharaoh. This is partly due to his
prolific building campaign, but also due
to the fact that he ensured his name was
inscribed more deeply in the stone than
any other pharaoh, so deep that it could
never be erased.
Ramesses II would rule for a total of
sixty-six years, and would be remembered as
perhaps Egypt's greatest pharaoh. His
full Egyptian name was Usermaatre Setepenre
Ramesses, which the Greeks would later
render into a name they found easier to
pronounce; they would call him Ozymandias.
More than a thousand years later,
the Greek writer Diodorus of Sicily
would visit Egypt and write an account
of visiting one monument to Ramesses II.
At its entrance, there is a pylon
constructed of variegated stone two
plethora in breadth and forty-five cubits high.
The inscription upon it runs,  King of
kings am I, Ozymandias.
If anyone would know how great I
am and where I lie, let him surpass one
of my works.
Ramesses would also build a new capital for
his empire, and with his military
ambitions lying in the north, he decided
to place it in the northeast of the Nile
Delta, and in characteristic fashion, he
named it after himself, calling it
Per-Ramesses, or  the house of
Ramesses . One Egyptian poem would celebrate
the beauty of this new city.
The residence is pleasant in life; its
field is full of everything good. It is
full of supplies and food every day, its
ponds with fish and its lakes with birds.
Its meadows are verdant with grass, its
banks bear dates, its melons are abundant
on the sands. Its granaries are so full
of barley and emmer wheat that they come
near to the sky; red wedj fish swim in
the canal of the resident city, which
live on lotus flowers.
This city of Per-Ramesses has long
been associated with the city of Ramesses,
referred to in the Hebrew Book of Exodus,
the second book of the Hebrew
Bible. Exodus describes a population of
enslaved Hebrews forced to work on the
construction of the city.
The reality of the Exodus story has
long been debated, and most historians
now consider it to be a piece of ancient
literature. There is no evidence for a
large population of Hebrew slaves ever
living in Egypt, or that the city of Per-
Ramesses was built by slaves at all. More
likely, it was built using the Egyptians
usual combination of skilled artisans
and seasonal peasant laborers.
But with the proximity of the
Nile Delta to the Levantine coast, it's
certainly not impossible that some of
these laborers were Hebrew people who
had traveled across the Sinai to sell
their labor in Egypt.
If that were the case, then for one
reason or another, they left no
impression in the archaeological record,
but perhaps printed an indelible mark on
our collective imaginations.
When Ramesses finally died in 1213 BC,
he was probably nearly ninety years
old. His reign had been one of Egypt's
golden ages, but his long rule had once
again created that old king problem; all
of his heirs were now also old men. By
the time of his death, twelve of his oldest
sons had already died, and now his
thirteenth son took the throne at the age
of about seventy. He was the pharaoh
Merneptah. But only a few years into this
man's reign, Egypt was attacked by a
devastating new enemy.
These were the Libyan people to
the west of the Nile Delta.
The king of Libya, a man named
Meryey, had seemingly planned his attack
for some time. All of a sudden, a large
Libyan army flooded through Egypt's
northwestern border, and they were
reinforced with groups of people from
all over the Mediterranean, perhaps from
Greece, Sardinia, Sicily, and elsewhere
across the sea. These were a diverse
group of peoples that had suddenly begun
to appear in increasing numbers across
the Eastern Mediterranean.
They would later become
known as the sea peoples.
The pharaoh Merneptah remembers
this event on one carved stelae.
The wretched fallen chief of Libya, Meryre,
son of Ded, has fallen upon the country
of Tehenu with his bowmen; Sherden, Shekelesh,
Ekwesh, Lukka, Teresh, taking the best of every
warrior and every man of war of his
country. He has brought his wife and his
children; leaders of the camp, and he has
reached the western boundary in the
fields of Perire.
The pharaoh Merneptah defeated this invasion,
and as a warning to any others who would
try such a surprise attack, he had many
of the invading soldiers impaled along
the road into Memphis.
The princes are prostrate, saying,
Mercy!  Not one raises his head among
the nine bows. Desolation is for Tehenu;
Hatti is pacified; plundered is the Canaan
with every evil. Hurra is become a widow.
All lands together, they are pacified.
But these lands would not stay
pacified for long.
After the death of the pharaoh
Merneptah around 1204 BC, Egypt entered a
period of civil strife, with the
descendants of Ramesses fighting over who
would take the crown.
Against this backdrop, the entire
region also once again began to
experience a series of record
droughts. What caused this climate
shift is uncertain.
As we saw in our second
episode on the Bronze Age collapse, the cause
may have been volcanic, with a large
eruption taking place in the Icelandic
volcano of Hekla around this time. Others
have proposed that an eruption in Sicily
around 1300 BC may have been to blame, or
that the super volcano Thera in Santorini
may have resumed some activity some five
hundred years after its last enormous
eruption. The cause may not have been
volcanic at all, and could have been due
to variations in the sun's activity or
weather systems in the Atlantic,
depriving the Mediterranean of moisture.
The reality was much as it is today; the
planet's climate system is fragile,
interconnected, and chaotic, and even
relatively small changes in its
equilibrium can have devastating
effects. During this time, formerly green
lands became dry and arid, and more
plants suited to desert landscapes
flourished. Analysis of sediment cores
and oxygen isotopes in cave mineral
deposits have all shown that the 13th
and 12th centuries BC saw much less rain
than the preceding
centuries. Alongside this scientific
evidence, we can see marks of severe
drought in the region's written records,
too. Egypt's great rivals, the Hittites, in
their stony mountains, were hit
particularly hard by the
drought. One Hittite text has come down
to us that seems to capture the spirit
of this age, and it is known as the myth
of Telepinu.
It comes from a poetic
convention known as  the vanishing god
myth, which describes how a certain deity
is so offended by the misdeeds of
humanity that he flies into a fit of
sorrow and abandons his
duties. Telepinu was a god of farming,
fertility, and the weather. The beginning
of the text has been lost, so we don't
know what it was humanity did to provoke
his rage, but the poem describes its
deadly consequences.
Thereupon, soot beset the windows;
smoke beset the house. The ashes
lay crammed on the hearth. Off stalked
Telepinu. Grain and abundance he
took away from field and meadow.
Off to the copses stalked Telepinu,
and in a copse he buried
himself. Forthwith, the seed ceased to
yield produce; oxen, sheep, and men ceased
to breed, while even those that had
conceived did not bear.
Hillsides were bare; trees were bare
and put forth no new branches.
Pastures were bare; springs ran dry.
A famine arose in the land; men and gods
alike were about to perish of hunger.
While the Egyptians may have
celebrated this weakening of their great
rival, in Egypt, the situation was hardly
any better. One text dated to around the
year 1200 BC is called the Lament to Amun,
and it stands as a wail of sorrow
in a darkening age.
Come to me, father Amun, protect me
in this bitter year of
confrontation. God shines in the sun, yet
he will not shine. Winter crowds hard
upon summer; months happen backwards;
disheveled hours lurch drunken by. Those
cut down in high places cry out to you,
Amun; these words came on the the
poisoned air, spoken by herdsmen in
fields and marshes, by those who beat
clothes on the banks of the river, by
district police deserting their
precincts, by horned beasts on our
burning deserts.
From this period of unrest and
the chaos in Egypt's royal court, which
lasted for about a century, a military
strongman named Setnakhte would eventually
rise to power.
He would rule for only three years before
dying and passing the throne on to his
young son. This boy
was the empire's last hope
to turn around its floundering fortunes,
and if such a hope was to be sustained,
there was only one name he could
possibly rule under.
His parents would name him after
his great predecessor, who had ruled
nearly a century before and fought at
the battle of Kadesh. And so, this boy would
rule as Ramesses III.
This new boy king Ramesses was a
determined and tenacious ruler, and it's
clear that he openly admired and sought
to emulate the legendary pharaoh of
old. He even went so far as to name
all his own sons after the sons of
Ramesses II, and also gave them all the
same positions in his court.
It was clear he wanted to do
everything he could to recreate the
glory days that had slipped out of
Egypt's grasp, as he writes in one of
his inscriptions.
Rejoice ye, O Egypt, to the
height of heaven, for I am ruler of the
south and north upon the throne of Atum.
The gods have appointed me to be king
over Egypt, to be victor, to expel them
for her from the countries; they decreed
to me the kingdom while I was a child,
and my reign is full of plenty.
Under other circumstances, Ramesses
might have been one of Egypt's great
rulers, but the entire region was soon to
be convulsed in a series of bitter
wars. One of the great drivers of these
conflicts was the loose collection of
peoples that had first appeared in the
reign of the pharaoh Merneptah, and who are
known as the sea peoples.
These invaders were now
descending on the entire region in ever-
greater numbers, apparently spurred by
widespread crop failures in Northern and
Western Europe. Already, powerful trading
cities like the port town of Ugarit had
been attacked by sea, seemingly by
complete surprise, and they were
destroyed so thoroughly that they were
never reoccupied.
The Egyptians  great rivals, the Hittites,
were now on the brink of collapse, as
trade networks around the region went
into freefall.
Ramesses remembers this time of
strife as these northern Invaders
descended on the coast.
The northerners in their isles were
disturbed, swept away in battle. Not one
stood before their lands; from Kheta,
Carchemish, Arvad, Alasa, they were wasted.
They set up a camp in one place in Amor.
They desolated his people and his land like
that which is not.
When news of the sea people's attacks
came to Ramesses, he would have been pharaoh
for about eight years. He had already
repelled two further invasions from
Libya and must have been rising in
confidence. But the news troubled him, and
soon he got word that the fleet of the sea
peoples was on the move and were heading
to Egypt, as he recounts in the inscription
on his mortuary temple at Medinet Habu.
They came with fire prepared before
them, forward to Egypt. Their main support
was Peleset, Thekel, Shekelesh, Denyen, and
Weshesh. Their lands were united, and they laid
their hands upon the land as far as the
Circle of the Earth. Their hearts were
confident, full of their plans.
Ramesses knew that these attackers would
have to be stopped, and he decided that
he would make his stand at the mouth of
the Nile, the lush, fertile
delta. He would have to play to what
strengths the Egyptian army still had in
this challenging terrain.
He decided to lay an ambush and
give the sea peoples a surprise attack
of their own.
Now, it happened through this god, the
lord of gods, that I was prepared and
armed to trap them like wild fowl. I
equipped my frontier at Zahi, prepared
before them. The chiefs, the captains of
infantry, the nobles, I caused to equip
the harbor-mouths like a strong wall,
with warships, galleys, and barges.
They were manned completely from
bow to stern with valiant warriors
bearing their arms, soldiers of all the
choicest of Egypt, being like lions
roaring upon the mountaintops. Their
horses were quivering in their every
limb, ready to crush the countries under
their feet.
As the enemy's ships amassed, Ramesses
gathered archers on the banks, supported
by spearmen and cavalry in their
thousands, all concealed in the reeds. The
tension must must have been tremendous,
all the soldiers of the Egyptian army
holding their breath and waiting for
that first sign of an enemy
ship. Then at last, a sail was
sighted. After that came another and
another, until the whole fleet of the sea
peoples was in sight. The Egyptians must
have been able to hear the creak of
10,000 oars, the beating of the drums, the
shouts of the helmsmen and soldiers.
Then, once the sea people's ships
were within range, Ramesses
struck. Arrows flew out of the reeds and
rained down on the ships.
Panicked, the invaders attempted to
land on the banks, but as they did, the
Egyptian spearmen appeared out of the
treeline and met them with a shield
wall. While the enemy was held at bay, the
Egyptian navy sailed in down the river.
Those who reached my boundary, their
heart and their soul are finished
forever and ever. As for those who had
assembled before them on the sea, the
full flame was in their front, before the
harbor-mouths, and a wall of metal upon
the shore surrounded them. They were
dragged, overturned, and laid low upon the
beach; slain, and made heaps from stern to
bow of their galleys, while all their
things were cast upon the water.
Thus, I turned back the waters to
remember Egypt, and when they even
mention my name in their land, may it
consume them with fear.
The pharaoh's plan had worked. The
Egyptians were the first people to turn
back these sea-going invaders and stop their
campaign of destruction.
Ramesses  inscription at Medinet Habu
ends on the following triumphant note.
Rejoice ye, O Egypt; I have expelled
your mourning which was in your heart,
and I have made you dwell in peace. Those
whom I have overthrown shall not return.
But despite their victory, the
land of the pharaohs now stood alone in
a devastated region.
Virtually every other society
around them had been gutted and reduced
to ash. Numerous long-established
civilizations, the Mycenaean Greeks,
the Hittites, Ugarit, and Babylon had
collapsed, and civil order had given way
to chaos. The precarious trade routes on
which they had all relied to supply them
with bronze and other commodities were
now broken, and Egypt's economy went
into a steep and unstoppable decline.
By the end of this period, which has
become known as the Late Bronze Age
collapse, Egypt was a shadow of its
former self. As other
enemies encroached on its
borders, Egypt was able to fight them off,
but its treasury became so depleted that
it never fully recovered its imperial
power. The first workers  strike in
recorded history happened during the
29th year of Ramesses III's reign, when
Egypt could no longer provide food
rations for its elite artisans who were
constructing the king's tomb in the
village of Deir el-Medina. The lack of
rations went on so long that the workers
eventually marched through the town
shouting the following chant.
We're hungry. There's no more
clothing, no more oil, no more fish, no
more vegetables. Send word to the
pharaoh. If food was not reaching these
crucial workers, we can only imagine the
dire situation in the wider kingdom. The
dispute dragged on for weeks, with one
leader of the protest even threatening
to damage a royal monument if they were
not paid. If was a threat that they would
never have dared to make unless the
authority of the pharaoh was beginning
to be seriously undermined.
Ramesses III ruled for another
two decades after his battle with the
sea peoples, for a total reign of thirty-one
years, but by the year 1156 BC, some
members of his family were beginning to
get impatient.
In the Egyptian court, all of
the women, the king's wives and mother
and other consorts, all lived together in
a large palace complex with its own
land. This was convenient for the king,
but it could also encourage courtly
intrigue. There was a strict hierarchy to
the pharaoh's queens, and everyone knew
that the children of his main wife were
to be his heirs before any others. Some
of the women who were lower down on this
ladder could at times resort to plotting
to improve their stations, and perhaps
get their own sons on the throne
instead. One of these women was a queen
named Tiye. Tiye was a secondary
wife of Ramesses, and
her son Pentawer was not in line for the
throne. In order to remedy this situation,
she began a plot that would go down in
history as the harem conspiracy.
Soon, she brought in other
members of the king's household and even
high ranking members of the government,
as one later papyrus records.
They are the abomination of the
land. The great criminal, who was then
chief of the chamber, was in collusion
with Tiye and the women of the harem. He had
made common cause with them; he had begun
to bring out their words to their
mothers and their brothers who were
there, saying,  Stir up the people! Incite
rebellion against their lord!
Alarmingly, one of the palace women
had written to her brother named Khaem-waset,
a commander of Nubian troops in
the south, and gained his support for
their plot. Others had even turned to
supernatural methods, making wax
effigies of the king's bodyguards and
laying curses on them to help their
scheme. Their plan was clear; to kill
Ramesses and install Queen Tiye's son
Pentawer as pharaoh.
The date they chose to strike was
during the annual ceremony known as
the Beautiful Festival of the Valley,
which was held in Thebes every year at
the new moon of the second month of the
harvesting season of Shemu.
During this festival, which was one
of the biggest of the year, the pharaoh
would go down to the river in a grand
and colorful procession, carrying the
statues of the three gods of Thebes;
Amun, Mut, and Khonsu. He would then board
his royal barge and sail with the
statues down to the Theban necropolis to
visit his grand temple, as one
inscription by a Theban priest describes.
We go giving praise to Amun,
kissing the ground before the Lords of
the Gods on his festivals, the first day
of Shemu shining, on the day of voyaging
to the valley.
Here, the citizens would give
offerings of food and drink and flowers,
as the boats sailed on the river with
three statues.
As the riotous, days-long
festival progressed, the plotters took
advantage of the disruption to make
a strike at the king.
It was day fifteen of Shemu, when the
pharaoh was relaxing in the royal harem
in the Western Tower of Medinet-Habu,
perhaps thinking ahead to his role in
the coming festivities, when a group of
assassins crept up on him with knives.
Their attack was swift and brutal.
Modern scanning of Ramesses III's mummy
reveals that his throat was cut right to
the bone with a sharp weapon, severing
the trachea, esophagus, and major blood
vessels. Death would have followed within
seconds. Ramesses has no defensive wounds,
suggesting that he was caught completely
unawares, but curiously, his big toe was
severed at the time of the attack.
This seems like an unlikely injury to
sustain during a struggle, and studies of
his mummy have shown that the embalmers
fashioned him a prosthetic toe to take
with him into the afterlife. This
suggests that the original toe was never
recovered, perhaps indicating that
someone took it as proof that he was
dead, or as a grizzly trophy.
Ramesses III had saved Egypt from
the sea peoples, but now he lay dying in
a pool of of his own blood, betrayed by
his own family.
But the conspirator s plot would
not go as planned. In the aftermath of
the bloody assassination, the son of
Ramesses III was able to crush the coup
and seize the throne. The plotters were
all put on trial, as well as any who had
heard about the conspiracy but failed to
report it. In all, twenty-eight people were
executed, and as a final punishment, they
were even cruelly renamed after their
deaths. The brother of one of the
plotters, who had commanded his Nubian
troops in the south, was originally named
Khaemwaset, a name which meant  came from
Thebes , but after his execution he was
renamed Binemwaset, or  evil in Thebes .
Another's name, Meryra, meant  beloved of
Ra , but he was given the somewhat spiteful
new name Mesedsura, or  Ra hates him .
Although order had been restored to
the royal succession, Egypt was in a much
reduced state. The death of Ramesses was
followed by years of bickering among his
heirs. Three of his sons would become
king at different times, each feeling the
need to memorialize him and shore up
their own legit legitimacy by reigning
as Ramesses IV, VI, and VIII.
In fact, the next eight pharaohs in a
row would all be named Ramesses after the
slain king, but many of these rulers were
ineffectual and reigned for only a
few years each.
Meanwhile, Egypt was increasingly
beset by continuing droughts, lack of
seasonal floodwaters, famines, civil
unrest, and official corruption.
Against this backdrop, by the
rule of Ramesses XI, a new power had
begun to fill the vacuum left by royal
authority. These were the high priests of
Amun in Thebes.
This priesthood had become not
only very powerful, but exceedingly
wealthy. Through a centuries-long game of
acquisition, the Amun priests now
controlled two-thirds of all the temple lands
in Egypt and ninety percent of all Egypt's
ships, along with mountains of gold.
On top of that, they were the chief
prophets and interpreters of the god
Amun-Ra's will, wielding a great deal of
influence over the kings and their
decisions. Over the last centuries, they
had changed the rules of the priesthood
so that they could pass their positions
on to their sons, essentially becoming a
kind of feudal royalty in the baking-hot
lands of Upper Egypt. One inscription on
the tomb of a high priest named
Nebwenenef describes the power of
this new hereditary role.
You are now high priest of Amun. His
treasury and his granary are under your
seal. You are chief executive of his
temple, and every foundation of his is
under your authority.
The House of Hathor, Lady of
Dendera, shall now be under the authority
of your son, as heir to the offices of
your forefathers, the position which you
have occupied hitherto.
Soon, the high priests in
Thebes became the de facto rulers of Upper
Egypt, even having themselves buried in
grand tombs and commanding their own
armies. In many ways, the pharaoh had
become something of an
irrelevance, and perhaps for that reason,
there would not be a Ramesses XII.
With the death of Ramesses XI,
the Egyptian New Kingdom finally
fractured less than eighty years after the
victorious battle with the sea peoples.
Egypt would never regain its former power.
For the next four centuries,
Egypt's influence would undergo a
steady but unstoppable
decline. One text written around this
time is called the Tale of Wenamun. It
describes an Egyptian diplomat who
travels to the north to collect some
cedar wood as tribute from the
Phoenician city of Byblos, but while
there, he finds that the name of the
pharaoh no longer holds the kind of
sway it used to.
Wenamun is robbed on his journey and
appeals to the ruler of Byblos for help.
That morning when I had risen, I
went to where the prince was and said to
him,  I've been robbed in your harbor. Now,
you are the prince of this land. You are
the one who controls it. Search for my
money! Indeed the money belongs to Amun-Ra,
king of gods, lord of the lands.  He said
to me,  Are you serious? Are you joking?
Indeed, I do not understand the demand
you make to me.
To make matters worse, the king of Byblos
refuses to pay the tribute of cedar wood
that the pharaoh demands.
Whether this story relates a
true event or is simply a piece of
literature, historians aren't sure, but
either way, it points to the much-reduced
state of Egypt's standing in the world,
something that had clearly become
common knowledge.
The 21st dynasty that ruled from the
northern Nile Delta through much of the
8th century BC were even descended from
Libyan invaders, peoples from along the
North African coast to the west.
While the earliest of these Libyan
pharaohs adopted classical Egyptian
names, by the 22nd and 23rd dynasties,
they reverted to giving their children
more ethnically Libyan names, and even
wearing Libyan feathered headdresses to
underline their identity.
Still, these Libyan kings were
an unruly bunch who held close to their
old tribal loyalties, and were frequently
distracted by warring amongst themselves
and their own lords and generals.
Meanwhile, the high priests of Amun
continued to rule Southern Egypt from
Thebes. But even further to the south, in
the lands of Nubia, another power was
rising. This was the Nubian kingdom of
Kush. As one of the two main African
kingdoms to the south of Egypt, Kush was
located at the fourth cataract of the
Nile, around the region of Sudan
today. For centuries now, this Nubian
kingdom had been crushed beneath the
boot of Egypt.
Repeated expeditions up the Nile
had seen Egyptian armies stamp out any
sign of a powerful rival appearing in
East Africa. But now
with the New Kingdom of
Egypt fractured and the Libyan Kings
ruling it in the north, fighting amongst
themselves, the Kushites were free to
build their own power base.
During Egypt's many attempts to
invade and hold on to the lands in Nubia,
Egypt had left a number of powerful
fortresses to the Kushites. One of these
had even become the capital of Kush, the
city of Napata,
but the Egyptians had also left
behind something else; that is, their
religion. The upper classes in Kush had
long adopted Egyptian gods and forms of
worship. Kushite rulers even referred to
themselves as  the son of Amun .
When Herodotus traveled down the
Nile in the following centuries, he
described this region, which he knew as
Ethiopia. Above Elephantine, the country
now begins to be inhabited by Ethiopians,
and half the people of the island are
Ethiopians and half-Egyptians.
Near to the island is a great lake,
on the shores of which dwell nomad
Ethiopians. The people of the place
worship no other gods but Amun and
Osiris. These they greatly honor, and they
have a place of divination sacred to Amun.
While Egypt had stopped building
pyramids more than a thousand years
earlier, Kushite kings had taken up the
building of pyramids of their own in
classic Egyptian style.
In some ways, Kush had become more
Egyptian than the Egyptians.
The kingdom was becoming
wealthy, too, its economy boosted by the
Nubian gold mines it controlled, and
trade with Sub-Saharan Africa.
This wealth soon led to a
powerful army.
One king of Kush named Kashta would
seize upon the opportunity that the
situation afforded.
While the Libyan kings of Egypt
squabbled and fought among themselves,
Kashta worked to gain influence over the
high priests of Thebes. Eventually, he
had his own daughter appointed to the
powerful title of god's wife of Amun in
the great temple of Thebes.
Once she was in that position,
she moved to consolidate her power and
claimed Thebes and all Upper Egypt for
her father's kingdom of Kush.
The Libyan kings in the Nile Delta,
distracted by their civil wars, did
nothing to stop them.
Upper Egypt was now ruled by Nubians.
When the Kushite king Kashta died,
his son Piye inherited what was now the
Kushite Empire.
Sometime around the 720s BC, King
Piye marched his Nubian armies down the
Nile and conquered the fracture states
of Lower Egypt.
Piye was clearly pragmatic in his
approach, and allowed any local governors
to stay in their positions, so long as
they swore allegiance to him. A victory
stelae that he carved records his
victories, which he dedicates to the old
Egyptian gods.
Hear what I have done in exceeding
the ancestors.
I am the king, the
representation of god, who issued from
the womb marked as ruler, who is feared
by those greater than he, whose father
knew and whose mother perceived even in
the egg that he would be ruler, beloved
of the gods, the son of Ra, beloved of Amun.
His son Shebitku solidified these
conquests and united Egypt once more. For
the next century, Egypt would be ruled by
the 25th dynasty, the Nubian pharaohs.
Over the decades that followed, these
Nubian rulers showed an enthusiastic
adoption of Egyptian culture.
They used the Egyptian language,
gave each other Egyptian names, and
worshiped the Egyptian gods with
apparent devotion.
They even embarked on an
enthusiastic program of pyramid-building
in Nubia, the first that the region had
seen in centuries, if nothing quite like
on the grand scale of the Old
Kingdom. But this flourishing of Egyptian
culture would not last long. That's
because to the north, a power had finally
risen that would eclipse the Egyptian
Empire for good.
That was the empire of Assyria.
As we saw in our thirteenth episode, Assyria
had arisen in the valley of the Tigris
and Euphrates rivers in Mesopotamia, and
by the 7th century BC, was perhaps the
most powerful empire on Earth.
They routinely amassed armies of
more than 100,000 soldiers, and under the
reign of the paranoid king Esarhaddon,
they were now pressing their power far
along along the Mediterranean coast, and
soon they dreamed of bringing it to the
banks of the Nile itself.
The Nubian pharaoh who would face
them was a man named Taharqa.
Taharqa was the fifth king of the
Nubian 25th dynasty, and he was clearly
proud of his heritage and his skin color.
He made sure that statues he
commissioned were carved from hard, black
granite, polished smooth. He had come to
Egypt as a young prince, and had been
chosen to rule after the death of the
previous pharaoh, as he writes in one
inscription. I was brought from Nubia
among the royal brothers that his
majesty had brought. As I was with him, he
liked me more than all his brothers and
his children, so that he distinguished me.
I won the heart of all the nobles and
was loved by all. It was only after the
royal hawk had flown to heaven that I
received the crown in Memphis.
Curiously, Taharqa was also a
believer in the benefits of long-
distance running, and insisted that all
his soldiers engaged in nighttime
marathon practices.
The king himself was on
horseback to see his army running when
he exercised with them on the desert
behind Memphis in the ninth hour of the
night. They reached the great lake at the
hour of sunrise, and they returned to the
residence in the third hour of the day.
This extreme stamina would serve
them well, and he would engage in
successful assaults on Libyan positions
across the desert, and capture territory
in Palestine.
Throughout his reign, Taharqa
was lucky; a series of exceptional Nile
floods led to a period of abundant
crops. Funds were clearly so forthcoming
that he donated large amounts of gold to
the Temple of Amun, and restored several
religious centers, as one of his
inscriptions boasts.
As His Majesty is the one who
loves the god, he spends the day and lies
by night seeking what is useful to the
gods, building their temples fallen into
decay, giving birth to their structures
as in the primeval times, building
their storehouses, endowing altars,
presenting them with offerings of fine
gold, silver, copper.
Now, the heart of His Majesty is
satisfied with doing what is beneficent
to them every day. This land is inundated
in his time as it was in the time of the
lord of all, every man sleeping until dawn
and never saying,  Oh, I wish I had
Egypt was now of a size and
stability that it hadn't seen since the
collapse of the New Kingdom almost four
hundred years earlier. It must have looked like
the dawn of a new era of prosperity, but
this luck was not to last.
In the year 674 BC, in Taharqa's seven-
teenth year on the throne, news came of a
terrifying army approaching from the
north. This horde belonged to King
Esarhaddon of Assyria.
Few foes had ever beaten the
Assyrians on the battlefield, and fear
must have spread up and down the Nile.
But somehow, against the odds, Taharqa
was able to repel this force.
The later Greek historian Herodotus
records a fantastical story in which
the invading Assyrian army was
attacked by a horde of nighttime pests.
Where the road comes into Egypt,
there enemies came, and during the night
were overrun by a horde of field mice
that gnawed quivers and bows and the
handles of shields, with the result that
many were killed, fleeing unarmed the
next day. For this reason, to this day, a
statue to the Egyptian king stands in a
temple with a mouse in his hand.
What exactly this account records
is difficult to tell. Perhaps it was an
outbreak of plague among the Assyrian
army that forced them to return home.
Perhaps it was even a daring nighttime
ambush by Taharqa's men, conditioned as they
were to run long distances in the middle
of the night, strike, and then disappear
into the darkness.
With their camp smashed and
their army in disarray, the Assyrian army
would have been pursued by Egyptian
chariots right back to their borders,
but we may never know. Perhaps
unsurprisingly, the Assyrian sources make
no mention of what must have been a
humiliating defeat.
The sting of this embarrassment
was clearly sufficient that three years
later, King Esarhaddon amassed an even
larger Assyrian army and marched back to
Egypt. This time, there was no standing
in its way.
The Assyrians flooded into the Nile
Delta, and Taharqa fled from Memphis and
into the south. The Assyrian advance was
so speedy that the pharaoh was not able
to evacuate his family when he left the
city. Esarhaddon s troops took Memphis, and
the Assyrian king wrote the following
gloating inscription about his victory.
I slew multitudes of his men and
I smote him five times with the point of
my javelin, with wounds from which there
were no recovery. Memphis, his royal city,
in half a day, with mines, tunnels,
assaults, I besieged, I captured, I
destroyed, I devastated, I burned with
fire. His queen, his harem, his heir, and
the rest of his sons and daughters, his
property and his goods, his horses, his
cattle, his sheep, in countless numbers, I
carried off to Assyria. The root of Kush
I tore up out of Egypt, and not one
therein escaped to submit to me. Over all
of Egypt I appointed new kings, viceroys,
governors, commandants, overseers, and
scribes. My royal tribute and tax, yearly
without ceasing, I imposed upon them.
But if Esarhaddon had hoped to easily
absorb Egypt into his empire, he was
mistaken. Just a year later, the Nubian
king Taharqa reappeared in the south,
reinforced with troops from the kingdom
of Kush.
Numerous governors that Esarhaddon
had installed immediately reverted their
loyalties, and the whole Assyrian
conquest looked like it might be undone.
Enraged, King Esarhaddon marched
back to Egypt to crush this rebel king,
but his health failed on the journey, and
he died in the city of Harran without
reaching Egypt.
Esarhaddon s son who took the throne
was the Assyrian king Ashurbanipal.
Virtually his first act as king was to
gather an army and march to the
rebellious province of Egypt to finish
what his father had started.
Ashurbanipal easily overwhelmed the now
weakened Egyptian forces, recaptured
Memphis, and in 663 BC, returned again to
crush another round of rebellions.
This time, he marched south up
the Nile River, and bore down on the
ancient capital of Thebes.
By that time, the Nubian king
Taharqa had died, and his nephew
Tantamani sat on the precarious throne of
Egypt. Tantamani met the Assyrians in battle,
but he was defeated, and with him, the
last of Egypt's hope would die.
The Assyrian army now rounded on the
defenseless city of Thebes.
Ashurbanipal records what
happened next on one carved cylinder.
This city, the whole of it, I
conquered it with the help of Ashur and
Ishtar. Silver, gold, precious stones, all
the wealth of the palace, rich cloth,
precious linen, great horses, supervising
men and women, two obelisks of splendid
electrum weighing 2,500 talents. The doors
of the temples I tore from their bases,
and carried them off to
Assyria. With this weighty booty,
I left Thebes.
Against Egypt and Kush, I have
lifted my spear and shown my power.
The Assyrian sack of Thebes was
the symbolic end of Egyptian power.
Though Assyria would not hold
Egypt for long and would itself collapse
within only about fifty years, Egyptian
esteem would never truly recover. A
century later, Egypt was conquered by the
Persian Achaemenid Empire, and in 343 BC, it
was conquered again by the Macedonian
forces of Alexander the Great.
When Alexander's empire collapsed,
Egypt would be left in the hands of one
of his ex-generals, Ptolemy Soter. For the
next three centuries, Egypt would be
ruled by his Greek Ptolemaic dynasty, who
spoke Greek and mostly refused to learn
the native Egyptian language.
These Ptolemies were still in power
when the tide of Roman expansion swept
across North Africa and finally, over Egypt.
The last independent ruler of Ptolemaic
Egypt had a name that in Greek meant
glory of her father , from  kleos , meaning
glory , and  patra , meaning  father .
Her name was Cleopatra.
It's unclear if Cleopatra had
any Egyptian ancestry, as her mother is
unknown, but she did at least make an
effort to learn Egyptian, as Plutarch
remembers. It was a pleasure merely to
hear the sound of her voice, with which,
like an instrument of many strings, she
could pass from one language to another,
so that there were few of the barbarian
nations that she answered by an
interpreter; to most of them she spoke
herself, as to the Ethiopians, Hebrews,
Arabians, Syrians, Parthians, and many
others, whose language she had learned,
which was all the more surprising
because most of the kings, her
predecessors, scarcely gave themselves
the trouble to acquire the Egyptian
tongue. When Rome finally invaded and
occupied Egypt, Cleopatra apparently
committed suicide, most likely by
drinking poison or scratching herself
with a needle dipped in toxin. The more
florid and famous rendition of her using
a venomous snake to kill herself was
suggested by some ancient writers, and
whether true or not, has proved
irresistible to generations of poets,
including, most famously, William
Shakespeare. With her death in August of
the year 30 BC, the final vestige of
independent Egyptian power died, too.
On the day of her death, Cleopatra
stood at the height of more than three
thousand years of Egyptian history. To her, the
Great Pyramid of Giza was now more than
2,500 years old, meaning that Cleopatra
lived closer to our time than she did to
the building of the Great Pyramid, by
more than five hundred years.
As Egypt came under ever more
foreign influence, its ancient culture
gradually underwent a
transformation. Over the following
centuries, as the Greek alphabet became
more prominent, the knowledge of how to
read hieroglyphics was slowly lost, as
one medieval Arab visitor records.
I asked why the inscriptions
which cover the pyramids of the temples
were indecipherable.
He answered,  Since the
learned men and those who used this
writing have disappeared and Egypt has
been occupied by a succession of foreign
peoples, the Greek alphabet and writing
have prevailed, and thus, they lost the
understanding of the writing of their
ancestors.
The last known hieroglyphic inscription
was written in the year 394 AD, at the
Temple of Philae, built on an island near
the cataract of the Nile at Aswan.
By then, the now-Christianized
Roman Empire had banned the worship of
pagan gods in Egypt's temples, but this
religious site was just outside of
Rome's borders, and so, worship of the
ancient gods continued here, in the last
of Egypt's great temples.
Here, the names of Ra and Ptah,
Anubis and Hathor, Amun and Bastet, Seth
and Horus, would still be spoken and sung,
the incense still burned, the cats still
fed, the offerings still
given, but this island temple was
increasing isolated, surrounded by the
crashing waters of a fast-changing
world. The last hieroglyphic inscription
records the mournful wish of one scribe
named Nesmeterakhem, wishing that his
inscription would endure forever, just
like the carvings of his long-dead ancestors.
Before Mandulis,
son of Horus, by the hand of
Nesmeterakhem, son of Nesmeter, the
Second Priest of Isis, for all time and
eternity. Words spoken by Mandulis, lord
of the Abaton, great god.
As the last-ever inscription of its
kind, in some ways he got his wish, but
it's likely that by the time he chipped
this message into the temple wall, few
people alive would know how to
read it. As far as we know, the art of the
hieroglyph died with him.
The temple was finally closed at
some point in the 530s by the Byzantine
emperor Justinian, and it was converted
into a Christian church to Saint
Steven. The age of Ancient Egypt had well
and truly come to an end.
Some 1,400 years later, in the year
1818, the Romantic poet Percy Bysshe Shelley
would enter into a friendly competition
with his friend, the poet Horace Smith.
They had both read in a London newspaper
about the coming arrival in the British
Museum of a remarkable fragment of a
statue, brought by ship from the Ramesseum
mortuary temple in Thebes in Upper
Egypt. It was the head and torso of a
statue of Egypt's greatest pharaoh, the
hero of the battle of Kadesh, Ramesses II.
The statue was one of a pair that had
stood at the doorway of his temple.
European colonial powers had long
been hungering after that fragment of
statue. Napoleon Bonaparte
had even tried to remove it
during his time in Egypt in
1798, but he found its bulk of black
diorite too heavy to shift.
Now, with wooden rollers and
hundreds of workmen pulling ropes, the
British team hauled the statue to the
banks of the Nile, where it was
transported down the river and on to
London. After reading about this statue,
Smith and Shelly agreed to wager. They
would each write a poem inspired by it,
and they would base their work on an
extract from the writings of the Greek
historian Diodorus of Sicily, who had
once visited Ramesses II's temple in
Thebes. Unfortunately for Horace Smith,
history has decisively concluded their
competition, as his poem is little
remembered, but Shelley's poem has become a
classic, one of the greatest and most
well-known sonnets in the English
language. Titled Ozymandias, it is a poem
that has come to stand as an emblem of
the vain, glorious pride of rulers, the
inevitable downfall of tyrants, the awe-
inspiring power of time, and the
transience of all things.
I met a traveler from an antique
land who said,  Two vast and
trunkless legs of stone stand in the
desert; near them, on the sand, half-sunk, a
shattered visage lies, whose frown and
wrinkled lip and sneer of cold command
tell that its sculptor well those
passions read which yet survive, stamped
on those lifeless things, the hand that
mocked them and the heart that fed; and
on the pedestal these words appear:  My
name is Ozymandias, king of kings; look on
my works, ye Mighty, and despair!
Nothing beside remains. Round the
decay of that colossal wreck, boundless
and bare, the lone and level sands
stretch far away.
On the tomb wall of a Pharaoh Intef
of the Middle Kingdom is a piece of
literature known as the Harper s Song,
written in Egyptian hieroglyphics.
It was a song designed to
be sung at funerals, and is more than
4,200 years old.
At the time of writing his poem Ozymandias,
Percy Bysshe Shelley could not have
known about this piece of ancient
literature, since hieroglyphics would not
be conclusively deciphered for several
more years. But across the gulf of four
millennia, he and the unknown author of
this song both describe a human emotion
that is all too familiar, the deep sense
of awe and melancholy we feel when we
look at ruined places, at the crumbling
palaces of long-fallen emperors, at the
tombs of kings whose age has passed into
dust. As you listen,
imagine the vast gulf of
time that separates our world from
theirs. Imagine the sadness of watching
your language forgotten and your cities
crumbled. Imagine the tombs of ancient
kings lying opened and robbed, the fallen
pillars of emptied temples half-buried
in the sand, which shifts and rolls over
the stones, as the great disc of the sun
sets red and blazing for a final time on
the empire of Egypt.
One generation passes; another
stays behind. Such has it been since the
men of ancient times. The gods of long
ago rest in their pyramids, and yet,
the great and blessed likewise
lie buried in their tombs.
Yet those who built great mansions,
their places are no more.
What has become of them all?
I have heard their words retold time
and again, but where
are their dwellings now?
Their walls are in ruins and their
places are no more, like something that
has never been.
There is no return for them
to explain their present state of being,
to say how it is with them, to gentle our
hearts until we make our journey to the
place where they have gone.
So follow your heart and your
happiness; conduct your affairs on Earth
as your heart dictates,
for that day of mourning will
surely come for you, so spend your days
joyfully and do not grow weary of
living. No man takes his things with him,
and none who go can ever come back
again.
Thank you once again for listening
to the Fall of Civilizations Podcast. I'd
like to thank my voice actors for this
episode; Alexandra Boulton, Lachlan Lucas,
Michael Hajiantonis, Tom Marshall-Lee,
Nick Denton, Peter Walters, Rhy Brignell, and
Paul Casselle. Readings in Arabic were
performed by Nassim El-Boujjoufi. Readings in
Ancient Egyptian were performed by
Seqnenra Mohammad Habib.
I'd also like to thank my
historical adviser for this episode, the
Egyptologist Dr. Chris Naunton. A full list
of sources can be found in the
description below, and are publicly
available on the show's Patreon page.
As some of you may be aware, Fall of
Civilizations will soon be available in
book form around the world. The book is
called Fall of Civilizations: Stories of
Greatness and Decline, by me, Paul Cooper.
It offers the definitive version of the
show, updated, expanded, and with maps and
images attached. The book is coming in
April of 2024 for UK readers, and later in
the year for listeners in the United States.
Please head to fallofcivilizations.com
to find out more information
and for pre-order links.
Every pre-order helps boost the book's
rankings and supports the show. I love to
hear your thoughts and responses on
Twitter, so please come and tell me what
you thought. You can follow me @PaulMMCooper,
and if you'd like updates about
the podcast, announcements about new
episodes, as well as
images, maps, and reading
suggestions, you can follow the podcast
at Fall_Of_Civ_Pod, with underscores
separating the words. This podcast can
only keep going with the support of our
generous subscribers on Patreon. You keep
me running, you help me cover my costs,
and you help keep the podcast ad-free.
You also let me dedicate more time to
researching, writing, recording, and
editing, to get the episodes out to you
faster, and bring as much life and detail
to them as possible. I want to thank all
my subscribers for making this happen. If
you enjoyed this episode, please consider
heading to
patreon.com/fallofcivilizations_podcast,
or just Google
Fall of Civilizations Patreon . That's
P-A-T-R-E-O-N, to contribute something and
help keep the podcast
running. For now, all the best, and thanks
for listening.